Amazon bigs discussed plans to smear the Staten Island warehouse worker they canned after he organized a protest of the company’s coronavirus response, according to a report on Thursday.

Company executives explored a PR strategy for dealing with public backlash following the firing of Chris Smalls, who had led a walkout at the Bloomfield facility this week to demand greater protection amid the coronavirus outbreak, Vice News reported.

“He’s not smart, or articulate,” Amazon general counsel David Zapolsky said in notes from an internal meeting of Amazon leadership obtained by the outlet.

“To the extent the press wants to focus on us versus him, we will be in a much stronger PR position than simply explaining for the umpteenth time how we’re trying to protect workers,” Zapolsky wrote.

Smalls, 31, told The Post he believes the company tried to silence him after he and other employees on Monday walked off the job to demand that their warehouse be cleaned and sanitized after a staffer there tested positive for COVID-19.

They also urged Amazon to be more transparent about how many staffers at the facility had been infected and asked for paid time off for folks who feel sick or need to self-quarantine.

Workers at Amazon's Staten Island warehouse strike over demands that the facility be shut down and cleaned after one staffer tested positive for the coronavirus. REUTERS Workers at Amazon's Staten Island warehouse strike over demands that the facility be shut down and cleaned after one staffer tested positive for the coronavirus. white Workers at Amazon's Staten Island warehouse strike over demands that the facility be shut down and cleaned after one staffer tested positive for the coronavirus. white Workers at Amazon's Staten Island warehouse strike over demands that the facility be shut down and cleaned after one staffer tested positive for the coronavirus. Getty Images Workers at Amazon's Staten Island warehouse strike over demands that the facility be shut down and cleaned after one staffer tested positive for the coronavirus. Getty Images Workers at Amazon's Staten Island warehouse strike over demands that the facility be shut down and cleaned after one staffer tested positive for the coronavirus. Getty Images Workers at Amazon's Staten Island warehouse strike over demands that the facility be shut down and cleaned after one staffer tested positive for the coronavirus. Getty Images Ad Up Next Close New Giants linebacker could be next Markus Golden There is much to demonstrate for Kyler Fackrell, the new... 7 View Slideshow Back Continue Share this: Facebook

Twitter

Flipboard

WhatsApp

Email

Copy

Advertisement

Amazon said Smalls was fired for violating social distancing guidelines and a company-imposed 14-day quarantine after he came into contact with an employee who tested positive for the virus.

The discussion on how to deal with a wave of bad press and calls for investigations following the incident took place during a daily meeting, which included CEO Jeff Bezos, and other top brass.

Part of the strategy involved putting Smalls in the spotlight when the company was questioned about worker safety, according to the leaked notes.

“We should spend the first part of our response strongly laying out the case for why the organizer’s conduct was immoral, unacceptable, and arguably illegal, in detail, and only then follow with our usual talking points about worker safety,” Zapolsky wrote.

“Make him the most interesting part of the story.”

They discussed painting Smalls as “the face of the entire union/organizing movement” at Amazon. Employees at the Staten Island warehouse launched an effort to unionize in 2018.

In a statement to VICE News, Zapolsky said his “comments were personal and emotional.”

“I was frustrated and upset that an Amazon employee would endanger the health and safety of other Amazonians by repeatedly returning to the premises after having been warned to quarantine himself after exposure to virus Covid-19,” he said.

“I let my emotions draft my words and get the better of me.”