Across the nation, protesters are taking to the streets and business owners are filing lawsuits objecting to the shutdown rules. As the shutdown drags on, it’s causing job losses, bankruptcies and a sense that people are being robbed of their rights.

The liberal media label the protesters virus deniers. But the protesters have science and the US Constitution on their side.

Not to mention common sense. As Gov. Andrew Cuomo said Monday, “This is not a sustainable situation. Close down everything, close down the economy, lock yourself in the house.”

Start with the science. Data show almost all coronavirus fatalities are among the elderly and those with serious health problems. A staggering 68 percent of deaths in Pennsylvania have been nursing-home residents; in Rhode Island, it’s 70 percent. Shutting stores and restaurants didn’t save them.

A lockdown targeted to protecting the highest-risk group, people 65 and over, instead of confining all age groups would slash deaths by half but at only half the economic cost of a total shutdown, according to new National Bureau of Economic Research findings.

Unfortunately, social-media plat­forms are censoring science that challenges the shutdown. YouTube says its policy is to ban content that “disputes the efficacy of local health authority recommended guidance.”

Shame on YouTube and its parent company, Google. They also censor views at odds with the World Health Organization, which helped get us into this mess.

Remember that just a few weeks ago, shutting down schools and businesses was justified to “flatten the curve,” meaning buying time for hospitals to add beds and gather enough ventilators, masks and other medical equipment.

The shutdown’s goal wasn’t eradicating the virus. That’s not possible. The Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy at the University of Minnesota, as well as other experts, predicts the virus will last another 18 months to two years, fading once most Americans have been exposed and developed immunity.

As Colorado lifted its shutdown last week, the governor explained it’s a “balance” between keeping the virus “at a level that won’t overwhelm our hospital systems and allowing people to still try and earn a living.”

Amen to that. The biggest divide in this country is about who’s getting a paycheck.

Some government officials who get paid show no respect for working people who don’t. How else to explain Gov. Janet Mills’ decision to bar Maine hotels from taking reservations for the summer season? Or Michigan’s Gov. Gretchen Whitmer’s attempt to close grass-mowing businesses, though the virus is seldom transmitted outdoors?

When the shutdown was temporary and tied directly to hospital preparedness, lawsuits challenging it didn’t stand a prayer. The US Supreme Court ruled in 1905 that a state “has the right to protect itself against an epidemic” using reasonable regulations.

But shutdowns lose their reasonableness when they have no deadline or benchmark to meet. Their vagueness tramples the public’s rights, including the right to own property without the government making it worthless.

Monday, Cuomo set out a four-phase reopening. Not all of the benchmarks are wise, but benchmarks pegged to hospital capacity are on the mark. He should add nursing-home preparedness, too, because that’s where deaths are occurring. Don’t overlook that twice, governor.

The public should shudder at Mayor Bill de Blasio’s vague announcement that the city’s reopening is “a few months away at a minimum.” That could reduce the city to a wasteland of boarded-up storefronts, abandoned commercial buildings, landlords defaulting on taxes and soaring tax rates for the taxpayers still in the city.

As for when New York schools reopen, science indicates schools aren’t a source of transmission. If schools are kept closed in the fall in defiance of this fact, say good bye to the middle class with kids. New York will be for the poor and uber-rich only.

Betsy McCaughey, a former lieutenant governor of New York, is chairwoman of the Committee to Reduce Infection Deaths.