NY Post may be compensated and/or receive an affiliate commission if you buy through our links.

If you’ve been feeling anxiety over current events, it might be time to browse a few soothing CBD products — especially in honor of this week’s cheeky 4/20 holiday, celebrated by cannabis lovers around the globe.

Besides their scintillating aroma, CBD (cannabidiol) products promise to reduce inflammation, calm nerves and alleviate pain. While few of these benefits are backed up by medical studies, the cannabis craze shows no signs of slowing down.

From CBD-infused oils and eye masks to gummies and skin-care potions, chill out with our favorite plant-based picks.

Puff begone

Say hasta la vista to dark under-eye circles with these hydrogel eye masks. Infused with cannabis sativa seed oil, green tea extract, chamomile and sodium hyaluronate, these miracle masks nourish, smooth and brighten delicate skin under the eyes.

No Puff Zone Hydrating Hemp Hydrogel Under Eye Mask, $9 Nails Inc.

Hydrated high

Constantly washing and sanitizing your hands can take a real toll on your skin. Let this natural CBD skin cream be your handy hydrating hero.

Natural CBD skin cream, $65 (2 oz.) at Dr. Kerklaan

Herbal essence

This shampoo and conditioner set — infused with hemp-derived CBD — gently cleanses, detangles and hydrates locks, leaving you with the ultimate hair high.

Super Garden shampoo and conditioner set, $72 at R+Co

Get lit

The only thing worth inhaling this 4/20 are the mild floral scents and rich, spicy and herbaceous aromas of this candle.

Cannabis candle, $55 at Malin + Goetz

Strike oil

Self-soothe with this restorative body oil, packed with powerful ingredients such as full-spectrum CBD and French maritime pine bark extract.

Ellis Brooklyn Marvelous CBD Massage & Body Oil, $65 at Standard Dose

Chew on this

This budding bundle will keep you calm and organized. The all-in-one kit includes a sleek leather pouch, a starter pack of CBD gummies and a gift card to a meditation app.

The Bee & Kit, $99 at Bee & Kin

Serenity now

Enjoy the stress-relieving benefits of this sophisticated skin-care cream. Its rich blend of terpenes, CBD and natural compounds delivers instant relief to dry and itchy skin.

CBD 300 Face and Body Cream, $125 at Chantecaille

Always sunny

Get baked and bronzed with the first luxurious CBD-infused tanning mousse. Nourishing botanical ingredients leave skin with a long-lasting sun-kissed glow — and a fresh scent.

Tanning Mousse, $55 at Opalens Beauty

Mist Mary Jane

This facial mist uses the finest THC-free cannabidiol (in combination with aloe, green tea, coffee and peppermint) to reduce redness and leave you fresh-faced for your next video call.

Tone Down spray, $29 at Fitish

Go green

Bask in the glow of your own complexion with this CBD face oil. Infused with Colorado-grown, organic, full-spectrum CBD, it offers TLC to dry, irritated or stressed-out skin.

Emerald CBD Adaptogens Deep Moisture Glow Oil, $98 at Herbivore Botanicals

Powder hour

Add a tranquil touch to virtual happy hour by stirring one of these soothing sachets into your drink. Packed with powerful anti-inflammatories agents such as turmeric, ginger and boswellia, along with CBD and tart cherry powder, the powders promise to optimize relaxation and ease sore and achy joints.

Soothing sachets, $50 (box of 12) at Nature of Things

Rub-a-dub-dub

Soak up the healing benefits of these CBD- and botanical-infused bath salts, designed to alleviate aches and pains. Ingredients such as sulfur detoxify and draw out impurities, while active botanicals soothe muscles and promote relaxation.

Botanicals bath salts, $29 at Vertly

Just a spritz

Let this earthy eau de grassy vetiver, with calming violet leaf and fresh lemon, be the high note of your fragrance collection.

Dirty Grass eau de parfum, $185 at Heretic

Chronic tonic

The debut of this bubbling face tonic (from vegan and cruelty-free skin-care brand Wldkat) comes just in time for 4/20. Charged with powerful ingredients such as broad-spectrum CBD, kombucha and ginger root extract, the potion leaves skin looking bright and radiant.

Ginger + Kombucha Bubbling Skin Tonic, $28 (available 4/20) at Wldkat