President Donald Trump on Tuesday said he would sign an executive order on food supply, as the U.S. was working with Tyson Foods during the coronavirus pandemic.

The order, reports the Associated Press, is meant to stave off a shortage of chicken, pork and other meat on U.S. supermarket shelves because of the coronavirus. The order will use the Defense Production Act to classify meat processing as critical infrastructure to keep production plants open, the news organization reported.

Speaking in the Oval Office with Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis, Trump said the order would address what he called “liability problems” in the food supply chain.

Meat-processing plants have weighed the risks of prosecution if they are blamed for spreading infection during the pandemic, as Indiana University’s Todd Haugh recently wrote. Tyson TSN, -1.25% , for example, suspended production at an Iowa pork processing plant due to an outbreak among employees of COVID-19, the infection derived from the novel strain of coronavirus.

“We’re working with Tyson, which is one of the big companies in that world,” Trump said.

Now read:Meat shortage looms as coronavirus shuts packing plants, leaving farmers with tough choices.

SMALL-BUSINESS SPEECH

Trump gave a speech Tuesday on the Paycheck Protection Program, the small-business loan program that came under scrutiny after some large companies were allowed to receive aid. He called demand “extraordinarily high,” after the program resumed lending Monday morning.

Last week, the Treasury Department said PPP wasn’t intended to help public companies “with substantial market value and access to capital markets” and gave such companies until May 7 to return funds.

Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said on Tuesday that the administration will audit small-business loans above $2 million, as he warned of criminal liability for companies who improperly received government cash.

The emergency-loan program for small businesses — which is designed to prevent layoffs during the coronavirus pandemic — had been closed since April 16, when it ran out of its initial $350 billion.

The PPP allows companies to have their loans forgiven if they spend money on payroll and benefits.

Now read:Emergency loans for small businesses ‘ﬂowed to areas less hard hit’ by coronavirus, study finds.

Sign up for Trump Today and more MarketWatch newsletters.