Republican senators introduced a resolution on Tuesday to formally oppose calls to "defund the police," an idea that has gained traction with some activist groups.

If passed, the nonbinding resolution, spearheaded by Sen. Tom Cotton Tom Bryant CottonRoberts sparks backlash from conservative senators with DACA ruling Hillicon Valley: Senate Republicans, DOJ target Section 230 | Facial recognition under the spotlight | Zoom launches E2E encrypted beta Republicans, DOJ propose scaling back social media liability protections MORE (R-Ark.), would put the Senate on record opposing efforts to defund the police while also calling for "justice" for George Floyd, an unarmed black man killed in police custody last month.

Cotton will try to pass the resolution on Wednesday by unanimous consent, according to his office, which will allow any one senator to object and block it under the chamber's rules.

ADVERTISEMENT

In addition to Cotton, GOP Sens. Marsha Blackburn Marsha BlackburnHillicon Valley: Trump tweet gets warning again | Australia under cyberattack | North Face pulls Facebook ads Republicans take aim at Google in fight to remove legal shield Rep. Sean Patrick Maloney blasts administration's response to pandemic; Oxford scientists say they've found first effective COVID-19 treatment MORE (Tenn.), Roy Blunt Roy Dean BluntThe Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Trump under fire as SCOTUS, Bolton deal blows Republican rift opens up over qualified immunity for police GOP senator blocks bill to remove Confederate statues from Capitol MORE (Mo.), Kevin Cramer Kevin John CramerWhen will Americans — all Americans — declare that enough is enough? Republicans prepare to punt on next COVID-19 relief bill GOP senators introduce resolution opposing calls to defund the police MORE (N.D.), Ted Cruz Rafael (Ted) Edward CruzTrade groups make lobbying push to be included in small business loan program Republicans take aim at Google in fight to remove legal shield Roberts sparks backlash from conservative senators with DACA ruling MORE (Texas), Joni Ernst Joni Kay ErnstThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Tulsa County reports highest number of new cases days before Trump rally; Botanisol Analytics CEO David Talenfeld says new highly mobile virus testing modules can help protect national security infrastructure Black voters need a new Senate as much as a new president McConnell plans to stay on as Senate GOP leader even if he loses majority MORE (Iowa), Josh Hawley Joshua (Josh) David HawleyHillicon Valley: Trump tweet gets warning again | Australia under cyberattack | North Face pulls Facebook ads Republicans take aim at Google in fight to remove legal shield Supreme Court surprises rattle disappointed right MORE (Mo.), Martha McSally Martha Elizabeth McSallyRising COVID-19 cases start political brawl in Arizona Black voters need a new Senate as much as a new president McConnell plans to stay on as Senate GOP leader even if he loses majority MORE (Ariz.), Pat Toomey Patrick (Pat) Joseph ToomeyGOP senators push for quick, partial reopening of economy NSA improperly collected US phone records in October, new documents show Overnight Defense: Pick for South Korean envoy splits with Trump on nuclear threat | McCain blasts move to suspend Korean military exercises | White House defends Trump salute of North Korean general MORE (Pa.) and Majority Leader Mitch McConnell Addison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellTrade groups make lobbying push to be included in small business loan program Protesters gather at McConnell's Kentucky home: 'No justice, no sleep' Republican rift opens up over qualified immunity for police MORE (R-Ky.) are supporting the resolution.

The resolution calls Floyd's death by a Minneapolis police officer a "horrific act that violated the public trust and was inconsistent with the values and conduct expected of law enforcement officers" and that "good law enforcement cannot exist without accountability and justice."

But it would also warn against understaffing or defunding police departments.

A majority of the Minneapolis City Council has gone a step further and said they will vote to disband the city's police department.

The resolution notes that "understaffed police departments and undertrained police officers increase the risk of encounters that result in the use of force, including unjustifiable or excessive force."

ADVERTISEMENT

It also states that "defunding the police would leave police departments understaffed and undertrained, while also increasing the risk of violent crime to the communities of the United States."

No senator has said that they support completely defunding police departments, though a number of progressives have urged lawmakers to curb funding.

Democrats unveiled a wide-ranging police reform bill this week, with leadership closing the door to trying to defund police departments through congressional legislation.

Former Vice President Joe Biden Joe BidenSusan Rice calls Trump administration 'racist to its core,' says Senate backers belong in 'trash heap of history' Trump mocks Biden event that practiced social distancing Trump to visit Arizona, Wisconsin next week MORE, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, also has said he does not support defunding police departments.

"No, I don't support defunding the police. I support conditioning federal aid to police based on whether or not they meet certain basic standards of decency and honorableness," Biden told CBS News.

Republicans have seized on calls by some activists to defund the police, signaling they plan to try to make it an issue heading into the November election.

Both the House and Senate GOP campaign arms knocked Democrats on Monday, characterizing the defunding debate as a new “purity test” for congressional candidates.

“We’re already seeing outlandish calls, defund the police or abolish the police, take root within the left-wing leadership class,” McConnell said from the Senate floor.