It took everyone in the newsroom. Journalists learned what was happening and why alongside the experts. And uncertainty and fear ran through everything.

This wasn’t from journalists covering the coronavirus though, it was HIV/AIDS in the 80s and 90s.

Kevin Fagan covered the epidemic in the San Francisco Bay area in the ’80s at the Oakland Tribune. He’s worked at the San Francisco Chronicle for the last 27 years.

Now, he’s covering the coronavirus in San Francisco.

“The near panic that you feel amongst our audience is similar to AIDS,” Fagan said. “It’s an unknown boogeyman that you really don’t know how to counteract.”

People might feel helpless now, as they did at the height of the HIV/AIDS crisis, but information now, like then, can save lives.

That’s the work, Fagan said.

“Which means we have to consult the best experts that we can find, and the best experts are still figuring this out also, just as they were with AIDS.”

The spread of the coronavirus has been a local story in San Francisco from the start, said the San Francisco Chronicle’s editor-in-chief, Audrey Cooper.

“We have half a million visitors from China a year come to San Francisco, and San Francisco has the largest population per capita of Chinese Americans and immigrants of any city in the world outside of China.”

At the start of the year, the Chronicle wrote about the impact on that city’s Chinatown, on xenophobia and the local economy. The newsroom launched a liveblog, which has by far been its most-read piece this year. The Chronicle’s daily podcast has seen downloads double, Cooper said. And it deployed its popular tracker tool to show where the coronavirus has spread.

This newsroom knows how to report on rolling breaking news, Cooper said.

“We think of things as 24-hour-news cycles, and they’re not anymore,” she said, “they’re not in California … It’s about how do you tell people what’s going to happen when you don’t know what’s going to happen? And how do you give them enough information that they feel like they’re getting something from you that’s helpful without being alarmist?”

Last week, Fagan visited a homeless camp to report on how that population is bracing for the coronavirus. Over the weekend, he came down with something.

He’s passed two screenings over the phone with his doctor and is staying home and resting.

Another lesson from covering AIDS applies now, too.

“Don’t be afraid,” said Fagan, who was feeling a bit better on Tuesday. “Keep a calm mind.”

And remember, he said, “you are doing a public service as a reporter. It’s very important.”