“The 360” shows you diverse perspectives on the day’s top stories and debates.

What’s happening

Massive protests in cities across the country in response to the death of George Floyd have once again brought the issue of police brutality into the national spotlight.

Outrage in response to excessive force by law enforcement has sparked some of the most turbulent events in modern American history, including unrest during the “long, hot summer” of 1967 and the Los Angeles riots in the early 1990s. More recently, the 2014 shooting of unarmed teenager Michael Brown in Ferguson, Mo. — along with a long list of other deaths — brought national attention to the Black Lives Matter movement.

The specifics of individual instances of police violence vary widely and are often heavily debated; however, the number of police killings has remained consistent, as have calls for reform in police departments and the criminal justice system overall. Between 2013 and 2019, there were around 1,000 people killed by law enforcement each year, or roughly three a day. The current year is on pace to match those numbers, despite weeks of lockdowns in response to the coronavirus. The impact of police violence is felt disproportionately by black people, who are three times as likely to be killed by police than white people.

Law enforcement can, undeniably, be a dangerous profession, and police may be involved in incidents that compel them to use lethal force for their own safety or the safety of others. Limited data from the FBI lists roughly 450 justifiable homicides by police each year.

Why there’s debate

Part of finding solutions to police brutality is identifying the tactics that don’t work. In response to the emergence of Black Lives Matter in 2014, many lawmakers and law enforcement officials made a significant effort to curb police killings. These reforms — which included increased use of body cameras and training on racial bias — don’t appear to have had a measurable impact nationwide. Most police policy is set at the state and local level, but the Obama administration instituted some nationwide rules during this period, including restricting the transfer of military weapons to police departments. President Trump has reversed most of the changes made by his predecessor.

Reform advocates say the most direct path to a decrease in police killings would be for officers who use excessive force to be held accountable and face clear sanctions. Only about 1 percent of fatal incidents result in a criminal charge, even fewer lead to a conviction. Legal experts say laws that give police significant leeway in using force and the political pressure not to be seen as anti-police make it difficult to differentiate between reasonable actions and unjustified killings.

Focusing on individuals isn’t enough and only major structural change will make a difference, reform activists argue. Despite static numbers of police killings nationally, some cities have been able to make significant reductions in recent years. Many of those places have adjusted their use-of-force policies to limit the circumstances in which police are permitted to use violence or require deescalation techniques first.

Others say change will come only when the public’s perception of the role of the police is transformed, especially among white Americans. Recognizing that the mere presence of police inherently means the risk of violence could lead to new forms of emergency response in which, for example, mental health experts or social workers respond to certain incidents instead of law enforcement.

What’s next

Former Minneapolis Police officer Derek Chauvin faces charges of third-degree murder and manslaughter in connection with Floyd’s death. He is scheduled to appear in court later this month. Minnesota’s attorney general said he plans to hold three other officers involved in the incident to “the highest degree of accountability” as well.

Congressman Justin Amash, I-Mich., plans to introduce a bill that would eliminate protections that shield officers and police departments from accountability for improper use of force. Challenges to these protections, known as qualified immunity, have also been presented to the Supreme Court.