Howard Stern is firing back at Donald Trump Jr. for calling out his past use of racially offensive humor.

It all started last week when controversy erupted over Stern’s use of blackface and the N-word in a 1993 comedy sketch that resurfaced online Thursday. It was edited together with Stern’s recent appearance on “The View,” in which he claims he never used the racial slur.

The clip — which he claims satirizes Ted Danson’s infamous blackface appearance in 1993 with his then-girlfriend Whoopi Goldberg — was retweeted Friday by Trump Jr., along with this caption: “Yikes! NSFW: Howard Stern says N-word too many times during awful blackface impression that should have Libs yelling ‘CANCEL!’ ”

The self-proclaimed “King of All Media” addressed the continuing controversy Monday morning on his SiriusXM show — and his words are classic Stern.

“Am I a bad guy? I don’t think so,” he said. “Donald Trump didn’t think so, he was on my show 27 times. Donnie Junior did the show. On TV he said, ‘I’m really disappointed in Howard, he’s changed,’ that I’ve gone Hollywood. Which is it? Do you want me to get in blackface and make fun of Ted Danson? I have changed . . . I remember how badly Donald Jr. wanted to take a picture with me. Dude, if you’re the president of the United States and you want to worry about me, go ahead. I don’t think I have much influence, honestly. And breaking news: Howard Stern was absolutely insane and out of his mind. I would take on anything and say anything and do anything.”

Stern went on to state that he doesn’t go back and watch his old shows — but he does “own” his past actions.

“The s - - t I did was f - - king crazy. I’ll be the first to admit. I won’t go back and watch those old shows; it’s like, who is that guy? But that was my shtick, that’s what I did and I own it . . . I evolved and changed . . . If I had to do it all over again, would I lampoon Ted Danson, a white guy in blackface? Yeah, I was lampooning him and saying, ‘I’m going to shine a light on this.’ But would I go about it the same way now? Probably not. Not probably, I wouldn’t.”

He continued with some fiery words for the Trump family, and ended by suggesting there are much more important things for the world to focus on right now.

“At the same point, I will say, it f - - king distresses me that Donald Trump Jr. and Donald themselves won’t go into psychotherapy and change . . . Attacking me during the coronavirus and Black Lives Matter is absolutely f - - king crazy, concentrating on me. You want to concentrate on me and bully me, and expose me, with all the TV shows I’ve done? They’re all out there. There’s nothing new here. We all know. I was the craziest motherf - - ker on radio.”