The Detroit Federation of Teachers released a statement Monday advising its members not to volunteer for service in the city's public school buildings after teachers at one school were asked to proctor in-person Advanced Placement (AP) exams beginning this week.

Three million students across the country will take AP exams this year, according to the College Board, which administers the exams.

In Detroit, 900 students take AP courses, according to the district, and 100 students either did not connect with the College Board to get the technology necessary, or do not have internet access. The district says it wants to help those students earn college credit.

“Although we can provide AP students with laptops for the test that could be returned, we cannot provide internet access until June/July. Therefore, the Executive Order regarding the closing of schools does allow schools to be used for distance learning and other activities such as food distribution," said Chrystal Wilson, spokesperson the Detroit Public Schools Community District (DPSCD), in a statement.

"In this case, it would be permissible under the Order for a small number of staff (25), mainly school-based administrators and volunteer teachers to facilitate the exam, across a 10-day period at nine schools across the city,” Wilson wrote.

The district says it will provide masks and gloves for students and school personnel and social distancing will be enforced at nine schools.

Steve Conn, a math teacher for Western International High School, part of this Detroit district, said he was shocked when he received an email last week asking him to proctor an exam at his school, where some students are expected to take the AP calculus exam on Tuesday.

"I think this is a terrible idea," Conn responded in an email to Western International's Assistant Principal Marsha Lewis. He provided a copy of the email to CNN.

"It means inviting people to let down their guard and take the UNNECESSARY RISK of contracting the disease, and either getting sick themselves, or taking it home with them to infect their families," he wrote. CNN has reached out to Lewis for a response.

Terrence Martin, president of the Detroit Federation of Teachers, said in a statement, "We continue to be concerned that the district administration has yet to provide a comprehensive plan to ensure COVID-19 related safety for our Members. Therefore, please be advised that you are not required to proctor AP tests next week. In fact, Members should not volunteer to provide service in DPSCD buildings at this time."