J.K. Rowling has cast a spell of controversy.

The "Harry Potter" author has come under fire for tweeting a message of support Thursday for Maya Forstater, a researcher who lost her job at a think tank for stating that people cannot change their biological sex.

"Dress however you please," Rowling wrote. "Call yourself whatever you like. Sleep with any consenting adult who’ll have you. Live your best life in peace and security. But force women out of their jobs for stating that sex is real? #IStandWithMaya #ThisIsNotADrill"

The “Harry Potter” author, otherwise known for her liberal political views, was label by many on Twitter as a TERF (Trans Exclusive Radical Feminist). The hashtag "#JKRowlingIsATerf" was a top trending topic that day.

A spokesperson for Rowling told USA TODAY the author would not have any further comment.

The researcher was a visiting fellow at the Centre for Global Development, which in March declined to renew her contract. A London judge this week upheld her dismissal, finding that her views of sex and gender were “absolutist" and "incompatible with human dignity and fundamental rights of others."

Forstater shared a copy of the judge's ruling on Twitter.

"I struggle to express the shock and disbelief I feel at reading this judgment," she wrote. "My belief as i set out in my witness statement is that sex is a biological fact & is immutable. There are two sexes. Men are male. Women are female. It is impossible to change sex. These were until very recently understood as basic facts of life."

The researcher noted she will use "preferred pronouns" as a "matter of courtesy" and that everyone "should be free to express themselves, to break free of gender stereotypes and to live free of violence, harassment and discrimination."

"But this does not require removing people’s freedom to speak about objective reality, or to discuss proposed changes to law and to government policies clearly," she added.

In a statement to USA TODAY Thursday, GLAAD's head of talent Anthony Ramos condemned Rowling's support for Forstater.

"J.K. Rowling, whose books gave kids hope that they could work together to create a better world, has now aligned herself with an anti-science ideology that denies the basic humanity of people who are transgender," he wrote. "Trans men, trans women, and non-binary people are not a threat, and to imply otherwise puts trans people at risk. Now is the time for allies who know and support trans people to speak up and support their fundamental right to be treated equally and fairly."

Rowling's tweet stirred controversy, with some criticizing the author and others defending her.

Among those criticizing her was the Human Rights Campaign, which tweeted: “Trans women are women. Trans men are men. Non-binary people are non-binary. CC: JK Rowling.”

J.K. Rowling says Dumbledore, Grindelwald had sexual relationship; fans mourn missed opportunity

"This is incredibly disappointing to see, from someone whose writing espouses so much kindness," wrote @LouisatheLast. "Ms. Forstater has the right to think what she pleases, but she does not have the right to expect that employers will always be okay with that. Trans people have to go to work too."

"As a gay man that found safety in Hogwarts throughout my childhood - knowing that Trans people wouldn’t be able to have that safety breaks my heart," wrote user @shahmiruk.

More:'Harry Potter' author JK Rowling gives $18.8 million gift for MS research

Some Twitter users backed Rowling and slammed the criticism directed at her.

"The one time you say something reasonable and everyone’s canceling you," wrote @MsBlaireWhite.

"Just in case you needed any further proof that the Left is the party of raging intolerance, cancel culture, blind hypocrisy, and the full refusal to compromise on even the most reasonable of ideas outside their 'woke' insanity....here we are, watching them cannibalize their own," wrote @iheartmindy.

J.K. Rowling mocks Trump with sarcasm: His Twitter rant is study of quiet strength

Contributing: Associated Press