Image copyright Reuters Image caption Davis's husband Joe told the crowd that his wife would not give in

Hundreds have gathered in support of a county clerk in the US state of Kentucky who was jailed for refusing to issue marriage licences to gay couples.

Kim Davis, an elected official in Rowan County, has said the Supreme Court's recent ruling on the issue conflicts with her Christian beliefs.

Some of her deputies began processing the licences on Friday, providing one to a gay couple previously denied one.

However, there is disagreement over whether the licences are valid.

Normally they require the signature of the elected clerk, in this case Davis.

On Thursday, Davis denied herself the opportunity to be released from jail after refusing a judge's request to allow her clerks to issue licences. US District Judge David Bunning said she could remain in prison for up to a week.

Image copyright Reuters Image caption Supporters assembled to listen to several speakers at the rally, including preachers

On Saturday Davis's husband Joe addressed the crowd outside the Carter County Detention Center.

"She won't bow, I promise you," Mr Davis told the crowd, the local Courier-Journal newspaper reported.

"I'm just an old, dumb, country hillbilly, but I know God," he added.

One of the other speakers, evangelical preacher Randy Smith, addressed the crowd saying: "Father we know what your word says. That homosexuality is an abomination," according to NPR.

The US Supreme Court on Monday rejected the argument that Davis's faith prevented her from carrying out her duty.

She can only be removed from her position if the Kentucky legislature impeaches her, because she is an elected official.

Various 2016 Republican presidential hopefuls, like Mike Huckabee, Louisiana Governor Bobby Jindal, Senator Ted Cruz and Senator Marco Rubio, have supported Ms Davis' decision.

Mr Huckabee has said he plans to meet Davis and stage his own support rally.

Others like Carly Fiorina, Senator Lindsey Graham and Ohio Governor John Kasich have said she must comply with the law.