You can say goodbye to the #MeToo movement. It had a good three-year run, but inevitably, hypocrisy and political expediency caught up with it.

Ninety-five Hollywood supporters of the #MeToo movement smeared now-SCOTUS Justice Brett Kavanaugh over flimsy sexual assault allegations in 2018 in an attempt to block his Supreme Court appointment. But now that Democrat presidential hopeful Joe Biden has sexual assault allegations of his own -- allegations with more corroborating evidence than the claims against Kavanugh at least -- these celebs’ appeals to believing victims no matter what have seemed to dry up. Some of them are even defending Biden and calling his accuser a liar.

Big names like Lady Gaga, Ellen DeGeneres, Jamie Lee Curtis, and nearly 100 more celebrities have had nothing to say against the man running to prevent President Donald Trump’s 2020 re-election nor expressed any solidarity with the woman who claimed Biden assaulted her in 1993. Not even several of the famous ladies belonging to female assault victims solidarity organization Time’s Up — like Jessica Chastain, Brie Larson, Natalie Portman and Julianne Moore — have offered a word of support to the alleged victim.

They weren’t so silent when conservative judge Brett Kavanaugh endured his Senate Judiciary Hearing in 2018, every single one of these nearly 100 celebrities smeared him on social media. Many insisted he was an alcoholic, “liar,” committed “sexual violence” and deserved have his “pesky penis” cut off, while the rest of these 95 concerned citizens implied it by pledging belief in Blasey Ford’s testimony.

Biden hasn’t been held to the same, or any real standard by his friends in Hollywood. It’s clear #MeToo has become a political weapon, not a moral awakening, as these virtue-signalling hypocrites sold it.

The Worst of the #MeToo Hypocrites

Alyssa Milano

Perhaps the worst offender in this is Alyssa Milano, whose pivot from defending one accuser to defending the accused was shocking. Milano, a leader of the #MeToo movement, pulled out all the stops in trying to get the public to see Brett Kavanaugh as a predator who assaulted Dr. Ford back in the ‘80s. In addition to dismissing the at-the time SCOTUS nominee as a liar and tweeting she believed Dr. Ford, she pulled stunts like sitting in the Senate building during the hearings and harassing Senator Susan Collins (R-ME) in her own office before the lawmaker voted to appoint the justice.

She sure seemed like she had female victims’ backs -- or so she wanted us to think at the time.

Two years later, Alyssa Milano abandoned those standards in order to protect her preferred presidential candidate from assault allegations. Instead of providing a platform for Tara Reade’s claims, Milano kept quiet for almost a month after they broke. Only after enough public pressure did Milano acknowledge the allegations. However she rationalized her support for Biden in a Deadline op-ed, claiming the Reade/Biden situation was not as “black and white” as the Kavanaugh/Blasey Ford situation.

This is the same woman who tweeted in 2018, “You can’t pretend to be the party of the American people and then not support a woman who comes forward with her#MeToo story.” Yikes, that did not age well.

The Women of TIME’S UP

Imagine you’re a Hollywood A-lister who has taken up the cause of a sexual assault awareness group that helped take down notorious serial-predator Harvey Weinstein. Wouldn’t you at the very least acknowledge, corroborated allegations against the person running to be the most powerful man in the world? Well some of the ladies of female victims awareness org TIME’S UP still have yet to say anything about Reade’s accusations against Biden, but they all pledged undying support to Ford.

Julianne Moore, Reese Witherspoon, Brie Larson, Kerry Washington, Jessica Chastain, America Ferrera, Natalie Portman, all members of TIME’S UP, have kept quiet about Tara Reade’s specific allegations since they broke. Not a hot look for the the group that revolutionized #MeToo politics. Reade herself called out the group on April 29 for having not paid attention to her.

Fox News reported Reade’s words: “You should be able to have your voice heard without losing your career and losing your job. And that's what your whole mission is about. Why do I not qualify for your mission? Why, because my perpetrator is the leading Democrat? Why does that exempt me from help?"

It’s a fair question. During the Kavanaugh hearings, actresses Moore and Ferrera participated in a PSA thanking Dr. Ford for her testimony of Kavanaugh’s “sexual violence.” Witherspoon tweeted against Kavanaugh. Larson tweeted, “#BelieveSurvivors,” and Washington tweeted, “Women must be heard. Today I am wearing black in solidarity with Dr. Christine Blasey Ford. #BelieveSurvivors #TIMESUP #StopKavanaugh.”

Chastain posted her belief that Kavanaugh was the man that “assaulted” Ford and Portman told Variety that Kavanaugh’s appointment demonstrated “how stacked” the system is against women. But what makes Biden so different for these women?

Since Reade’s admonition of these A-listers, TIME’S UP President Tina Tchen has acknowledged the need “for complete transparency into this [Reade’s] claim and the multiple claims against President Donald Trump.” Hmm, sounds like a bit of a qualification there. Tchen also praised Biden’s May 1 denial to MSNBC’s Nicolle Wallce, saying “Today, Vice President Joe Biden sat down and directly addressed the allegation against him with the seriousness it deserves, something that the current president has never done.”

Yeah they sympathize with Reade -- so they say -- but clearly they’re going easy on Biden and will deflect to Trump’s accusation if needs be.

Bette Midler

Bette Midler’s journey from #believeallwomen to #doubtingvictims is another major example of #MeToo hypocrisy. During the Kavanaugh hearings, the Hocus Pocus actress made waves with her radically over-the-top appeal to female victimhood.

Her empathy for Ford was apparently so great that in Sept 2018 she tweeted, “‘Women are the n-word of the world’” -- a reference to a John Lennon and Yoko Ono song. She elaborated with her own words, writing, “Raped, beaten, enslaved, married off, worked like dumb animals; denied education and inheritance; enduring the pain and danger of childbirth and life IN SILENCE for THOUSANDS of years.”

Of course, even Midler recognized that this was a bit extreme, deleting the tweet later. Though without a doubt, Midler had proclaimed that she was a female ally who prided herself on giving assault victims the benefit of the doubt. Well, that is, until the guy running against Trump got hit with his own set of allegations.

Contrary to most of her quiet tinseltown colleagues, Midler attacked Reade’s 2020 allegations head on, accusing her of orchestrating a political hitjob against the man that needed to beat Trump in November. As some news outlets like MSNBC broke the month-long media silence on Reade’s allegations, Midler became annoyed. She tweeted, “Why do the #Dems always twist themselves into pretzels over this shit? We heard Donald Trump say ‘I grab 'em by the pussy!’ and no one made a peep! Didn't seem to hurt him, but we have been paying ever since. Who is paying to #SWIFTBOAT Joe Biden??”

So much for believing victims. It seems she wants their stories buried, at least if we are judging by her Kavanaugh standard. In this case, wasn’t Midler doing her part in making another woman an “n-word of the world?”

Debra Messing

Of course you can’t mention lefty hypocrisy without good ol’ Debra Messing. The Will & Grace actress and sworn enemy of President Trump on Twitter got caught in a bit of #MeToo hot water when she tried to debunk Reade’s assault accusation against the former vice president on May 2. According to Fox News, Messing retweeted to her “635,000 plus” followers a Medium article doubting Reade’s integrity. But annoyed users guilted her into deleting it.

Several users jumped on Messing’s post, asserting that she was “shaming” survivors. Intercept journalist Glenn Greenwald responded with a sarcastic tweet that said, “Gee, I wonder why a woman might be reluctant to come forward with allegations against a powerful male Democratic politician.” Another wrote, “at this point Debra Messing is vying for Alyssa Milano’s position of useful idiot shaming survivors.”

Those charges proved troublesome for Messing who had just revealed a glaring double standard in her #MeToo values. Sure anyone might doubt Reade’s account but Messing had set the precedent that she believed all survivors during the Kavanaugh trial. During that fiasco, Messing tweeted, “We call on Judge Brett Kavanaugh to withdraw his nomination immediately. We the people, regardless of political party, will not tolerate a man credibly accused of sexual violence by multiple women as our next Supreme Court Justice. #TIMESUP.”

For Messing, Ford’s mere words were enough to convince her Kavanaugh was a rapist, but Reade’s corroborated evidence against Biden somehow isn’t worth anything. Even Deborah Ramirez’s flimsy claims against Kavanaugh were enough evidence for the actress in 2018.

Other Famous #MeToo Hypocrites

Jimmy Kimmel

Never one to break away from any of the day’s prevailing leftwing talking points, ABC late night host Jimmy Kimmel slammed Brett Kavanaugh during his show in Sept. 2018. The comedian butchered the SCOTUS nominee, saying, “Hear me out on this: So Kavanaugh gets confirmed to the Supreme Court, OK? Well, in return, we get to cut that pesky penis of his off in front of everyone.”

And when it came to Biden’s allegations, Kimmel was soft on the former vice president like the rest of the media. The host took some criticism for not asking Biden a single question about the allegation during their late night interview, which aired after Reade’s bombshell story resurfaced during a Rolling Stone podcast on March 25, 2020.

James Corden

CBS Late Late Show host James Corden made Brett Kavanaugh the brunt of his jokes during his October 4, 2018 broadcast. Corden slammed Kavanaugh as an angry alcoholic, but like Jimmy Kimmel, Corden avoided any controversy with alleged abuser Biden.

Corden interviewed the Democrat presidential candidate during his show on April 21, 2020, but did not mention anything about Biden’s allegations or Tara Reade during the segment. This was nearly a month after Reade’s allegations broke.

John Leguizamo

Ice Age actor John Leguizamo made a ridiculous about-face on his #MeToo politics from Kavanaugh to Biden. During the 2018 SCOTUS hearings, Leguizamo called the judge a “liar” in a facebook post, writing, “I wouldn’t hire Kavanaugh to work shuffleboard court, never mind the Supreme Court. #liarliarpantsonfire.”

However, when Biden’s allegations started gaining traction, Leguizamo, a member of the Biden campaign’s Latin outreach group, took the candidate's side. He jumped on articles that attempted to debunk Biden’s allegations, and shared them via Twitter writing, “Biden is cleared! Tara admitting it wasn’t assault!.” However when the Tara Reade story continued to gain traction, Leguizamo insisted that Reade’s claims be scrutinized more closely and even deflected to Trump’s own allegations.

Why couldn’t he give Kavanaugh the benefit of the doubt?

Jamie Lee Curtis

Halloween and Freaky Friday actress Jamie Lee Curtis scorned Kavanaugh in 2018, posting a mock picture of the U.S. Constitution being shredded on Instagram in response to the Justice’s appointment. She captioned it, saying “Appropriate and concerning. A call to action for us to protect the constitution and try to get the inclusion rider, the ERA added.”

Curtis even blasted Biden for his part in Clarence Thomas’ Supreme Court appointment in 1991. Curtis tweeted in 2019, “Come on @JoeBiden. Just CALL Anita Hill and then GO TO HER HOUSE and APOLOGIZE to her FACE. The longer you wait the worse it gets.”

Though since Reade’s allegation, Curtis hasn’t posted about the subject on either Twitter or Instagram. Could her hands be tied because Joe Biden is most likely the Democrat presidential nominee?

Randi Mayem Singer

Mrs. Doubtfire screenwriter Randi Mayem Singer outed herself as a huge #MeToo hypocrite since the Biden allegations. During the Kavanaugh hearings, Singer tweeted, “Mitch McConnell just stood on the Senate floor and called the women accusing Brett Kavanaugh liars. Somewhere in America a young woman was just sexually attacked. She hears him loud and clear. Vote.”

However, she made no such defense of Reade after her allegations against Biden resurfaced. She actually insinuated that Reade was a political plant, tweeting, “So is Tara Reade/’Jennifer’ trying to impress Vladimir on behalf of Donald Trump/’John Barron’?” When someone called her out for her double standard, she responded, “Men lie. Women lie. People lie. Have always had a problem with a blanket ‘believe’ approach. It devalues true victims. Women must be heard and listened to. I hope she gets the help she needs.”

Singer also shared an article with Twitter on May 11 that rationalized voting for Biden while believing Tara Reade’s allegations. According to the post, beating Trump is more important than punishing Biden for sexual assault, though Singer commented in her tweet that she’s still not convinced by Reade’s claims even though she agrees that Biden must win at all costs.

Sorry, Tara.

Patricia Arquette

Lefty actress Patricia Arquette slammed Kavanaugh back in Sept. 2018, quipping that “The only think[sic] Kavanaugh should Judge are the beers at Octoberfest.” She also agreed with now-disgraced anti-Trump lawyer Michael Avenatti’s claim that the FBI must investigate Judge Kavanaugh over allegations. Arquette responded to Avenatti, lamenting that Kavanaugh’s victims will suffer “the victim blaming and the ‘slut shaming’” from his defenders.

But now that Biden has allegations, Arquette seems to have changed her tune on victims. She deflected from Reade’s allegations to those of Trump assault accusers on April 30, insisting that MSNBC host Christ Hayes focus on those rather than the tough questions he had concerning Biden’s assault.

And on May 2, Arquette tweeted, “Which Tara Reade do you want me to believe? The one who last year said Biden touched her neck and made her feel uncomfortable Or this one?” Is Arquette “shaming” or “victim blaming” on this one?

Amy Schumer and Emily Ratajkowski

Lefty comedian Amy Schumer and supermodel Emily Ratajkowski made waves during the Kavanaugh hearing by getting arrested alongside 300 anti-Kavanaugh protestors. Ratajkowski tweeted Oct. 4, “Today I was arrested protesting the Supreme Court nomination of Brett Kavanaugh, a man who has been accused by multiple women of sexual assault. Men who hurt women can no longer be placed in positions of power.”

In a video posted by TPUSA Chief Creative Officer Benny Johnson, Schumer can be seen being asked by police officers whether she had been arrested. The comedian says yes and calmly takes her place in line. The point is, these ladies clearly enjoyed their virtue-signalling for the sake of “believing victims,” however now that a leftwing nominee is accused we haven’t seen these ladies protest his nomination.

Apparently standing up for victims against the left’s only shot at beating Trump is not a good look.

Of course it’s clear that the standard of “#believeallwomen,” -- that all-hallowed #MeToo mantra -- ended up only being a manipulative political weapon used against powerful men the left hated and put away when powerful lefty men were accused. In the end there was no benefit of the doubt for Biden’s accuser, Tara Reade, like there was for Dr. Christine Blasey Ford, or even lamer accusers.

Rose McGowan, an actress, alleged Weinstein abuse victim and one of the few consistent #MeToo activists had the stones to call out this hypocrisy. She blasted Alyssa Milano and other two-faced lefties on April 29, saying, “You are a fraud. This is about holding the media accountable. You go after Trump & Kavanaugh saying Believe Victims, you are a lie.”

McGowan added. “You have always been a lie. The corrupt DNC is in on the smear job of Tara Reade, so are you. SHAME.” McGowan may be on to something, at the very least she’s right about the Hollywood double standard.

So much for privileged male predators being the threat to women. If they are liberal, the rules don’t apply.