The claim: Vice President Mike Pence was caught on camera pretending to carry empty equipment into a hospital

A since-deleted video by late night show host Jimmy Kimmel alleged that Vice President Mike Pence delivered empty boxes of personal protective equipment to a health care center in Virginia for a photo op.

After dropping off the boxes, Pence is shown returning to a vehicle where an individual informs Pence that the remaining boxes in the car are empty. Pence is then heard saying, "Well can I carry the empty ones? Just for the camera?"

Narrating the video, Kimmel says, "Mike Pence pretending to carry empty boxes of PPEs into a hospital is the perfect metaphor for who he is and what he's doing."

Before deleting the video, other groups such as the New Civil Rights Movement and the Bipartisan Report had already reported the same claim. The video also gained a lot of attention on Twitter.

Occupy Democrats also shared the clip on Facebook that headlined, "OMG: Mike Pence caught on hot mix "delivering" EMPTY boxes of PPE to hospital ... and PRETENDING THEY ARE HEAVY!"

More:Pence aide’s positive coronavirus test is second this week for White House as Trump tries to project normalcy

Clip of Pence was edited

The clip is in fact real footage of the vice president, but the shortened clip cuts off before showing Pence making a joke about the empty boxes after delivering the ones that were filled with PPE.

The full video from C-Span reveals that Pence shuts the door of the van filled with empty boxes and did not pretend to lift or deliver any of the empty boxes into the hospital.

Jon Thompson, Pence's campaign communication manager, weighed in and tweeted "This is absolute garbage spread by @JimmyKimmel." Thompson then goes on to link the original C-Span video and says "Pence is clearly joking about empty boxes & if Kimmel showed the full clip from CSPAN, not the one he selectively edited, you see and hear it."

More:Trump sounds off on 'no talent' late-night hosts; Jimmy Kimmel, Stephen Colbert fire back

Kimmel deletes video, apologizes

Shortly after the video was posted, Kimmel took to social media to share that Pence was joking about carrying empty boxes for a publicity stunt.

"The full video reveals that he was carrying full boxes for a staged publicity stunt," Kimmel tweeted. "My apologies. I know how dearly this administration values truth."

The IndyStar initially reported on the viral clip, but noticed the discrepancies between the Kimmel segment on Twitter and the original C-Span video.

Neither Pence's office nor Kimmel has responded to our requests for comment.

The PPE that Pence was delivering is part of a shipment of 63 million gloves, 14 million masks, 13 million gowns and a little over 1 million pieces of eye protection equipment that will be given to nursing homes in the country, according to The Hill.

The facility that received the equipment thanked Pence and his team on Facebook: "We were honored and grateful to have you visit us."

Our ruling: False

We rate the claim that Vice President Mike Pence was caught on a hot mic delivering empty boxes of personal protective equipment to a hospital in Virginia for a publicity stunt as FALSE. The clip posted by Jimmy Kimmel was shortened and a full version reveals that Pence did not touch the empty boxes. The video has since been deleted.

Our fact-check sources:

Contributing: Matthew VanTryon of The Indianapolis Star

Thank you for supporting our journalism. You can subscribe to our print edition, ad-free app or electronic newspaper replica here.

Our fact check work is supported in part by a grant from Facebook.