“The 360” shows you diverse perspectives on the day’s top stories and debates.

What’s happening

President Trump signed an executive order on Thursday targeting the rights that social media companies have to alter or remove content posted to their platforms. The order came amid an ongoing dispute between the president and Twitter stemming from the company’s decision to append a fact check to two of his tweets falsely connecting mail-in voting with election fraud.

Trump and his allies have accused the social media giant of violating free speech by fact-checking his post. “We cannot allow a limited number of online platforms to hand-pick the speech that Americans may access and convey on the internet,” the executive order reads. Hours after it was signed, Twitter added a disclaimer to a tweet from the president that was interpreted as advocating mass violence against protesters in Minneapolis.

The main focus of the executive order concerns an archaic but critical portion of the Communications Decency Act. The provision, known as Section 230, protects social media companies and websites from being sued for posts by their users. It also allows them to edit, delete or modify content on their platforms. Trump’s order aims to remove those liability protections if a company’s content decisions are motivated by bad faith, such as political bias.

Twitter and other social media platforms have faced persistent calls over the past three years to regulate Trump’s online posts, which critics say include inflammatory and false statements that would cause a typical user to be suspended or banned. At the same time, Republicans have for years railed against major tech companies over what they argue is unfair bias against conservative political views.

Why there’s debate

Section 230 is considered by tech and legal experts to be one of the most important regulations of the digital revolution. Without protection from lawsuits over user-made content, companies like Google, Facebook, Amazon and Twitter would be afraid to remove objectionable material and would never have been able to grow into the market behemoths they are today, they argue. Revoking those protections could fundamentally alter the way the internet works and may even lead to more censorship if companies change policies to protect themselves from being sued.

Conservatives aren’t the only ones who have issues with Section 230. Some liberals claim it’s a major reason for rampant misinformation online. Presumptive Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden called for it to be revoked in an interview in January.

That said, there are serious questions about whether Trump’s order will hold up under legal scrutiny. Section 230 was approved by Congress in 1996 and likely can only be altered by it. Beyond that, Trump’s attempt to regulate social media companies’ editorial practices may violate their First Amendment rights, legal experts say. “Donald Trump’s order is plainly illegal,” said Sen. Ron Wyden, D-Ore., who co-wrote the Communications Decency Act.

Debates over the legal standing of the order are beside the point, some political analysts argue. The main purpose of the move may be more about sending a political signal than changing legislation. The mere threat of legal repercussions may make social media companies hesitant to cross the president by moderating even provably false statements in the lead-up to the election. Pitting himself against Twitter also allows Trump to push the “us vs. them” narrative that has been a successful rallying cry among his conservative base in the past.

What’s next

Several tech companies are reportedly already gearing up to challenge Trump's order in court. Meanwhile, Republicans in both houses of Congress have announced they are working on legislation to solidify elements of the order into law.

Perspectives

Trump’s order could be the first step in a major reworking of internet speech

“It’s a hugely ambitious proposal, arguably the biggest single attempt to regulate internet platforms, and for better or worse, it signals the beginning of an all-out war between Trump and any platform that tries to fact-check him.” — Russell Brandom, Verge