CBS News aired footage of an Italian hospital while reporting on New York hospitals and the ventilator shortage on March 25.

“CBS This Morning” discussed Democratic New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s allegation that the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) only gave the state 400 ventilators when they needed 30,000. (RELATED: Kentucky Gun Range Confirms ABC’s ‘Syrian Combat Footage’ Comes From Its Range)

The network aired footage of a crowded hospital room with the implication, based on what was being reported, that it was taken at a hospital in New York. However, this hospital was seen in footage during a Sky News segment on Italian hospitals and the novel coronavirus crisis that aired on March 22.

“It was an editing mistake. We took immediate steps to remove it from all platforms and shows,” a CBS spokesperson said in a statement to the Daily Caller.”

WATCH:

When talking about the Coronavirus outbreak in New York City, @CBSNews aired footage of a hospital in Italy. Especially in times of a crisis where people are already in a panic, the Media needs to give accurate information. Irresponsible.

pic.twitter.com/k2C8GWFS2J — Benny (@bennyjohnson) March 30, 2020

“CBS This Morning” aired a short clip of Dr. Deborah Birx, coordinator of the White House coronavirus response team, expressing her concern about the New York City and New York metro area.

“That is because more than half of the nation’s new Coronavirus cases are being found right here,” CBS News reported after Birx’s clip. “Crowded Subway cars may have accelerated the spread. New York’s governor says FEMA gave the state 400 ventilators.”

The segment cut away to Cuomo bashing FEMA for an apparent lack of ventilators. This is when CBS News showed footage that Sky News had reported as being from an Italian hospital, despite CBS’s report being entirely focused on New York’s coronavirus crisis.

“This is the main hospital in Bergamo, in Lombardy province. It’s one of the most advanced hospitals in Europe,” Sky News reported as it aired the footage shown days later by CBS News during its New York segment.