There's no specific intelligence information that Russia is interfering in the presidential election to help President Trump get re-elected, according to new reports.

Major media outlets cited anonymous sources last week who claimed that the Russians were working to boost the president. That's something both Trump and his team denied, including National Security Adviser Robert O'Brien.

"I have not seen that, and I get pretty good access," O'Brien said. “I haven't seen any intelligence that Russia is doing anything to attempt to get President Trump re-elected.”

Deputy White House Press Secretary Hogan Gidley said on Monday, "The way it has been characterized in the media is just completely false. We had two officials from this administration, high ranking, to come out and say they were in the briefing and the allegations of what happened actually didn't occur at all."

The fake news report came out of a hearing held by House Democrats.

"As far as these selective leaks are concerned, I just don't know how many more times Democrats can leak something selectively out of a committee. I don't know how many more times the media is going to fall for a lie from Adam Schiff or his staff before they just stop taking some of his quotes," Gidley continued.

The new reports say the intelligence briefer reportedly overstated Russia's actions, leaving out key elements.

Intelligence reports do say that Russia is trying to help Bernie Sanders campaign, although it's not clear how they might be doing that.

Gidley says the administration is working to make sure these 2020 elections are secure.

"No one's been tougher on Russia than this administration. What we've done to secure our elections, to make sure that every vote counts, every vote matters, is unprecedented. It was the Barack Obama administration who knew Russia was going to meddle and they did nothing. It was our administration that put a whole of government approach in place. We are now working with local governments, state, local levels, using FBI, DHS and others to ensure that those elections are protected. In fact, we're running tests in many states as well so that we can make sure that those devices they count votes on cannot be tampered with, cannot be meddled with."