Charles Ventura

USA TODAY

Bill Maher offered an on-air apology Friday for using a racial slur on HBO's Real Time last week, calling himself a "sinner" in the show's opening segment.

The talk show host took part in an extended conversation about race with political activist and Georgetown professor Michael E. Dyson, where the comedian attempted to clear the air over his use of a racial epithet during an interview with Sen. Ben Sasse, R-Neb.

“I wanted you to come by here because I want you to school me,” Maher told Dyson after delivering his apology. “I did a bad thing.”

“That’s a great place to begin, Bill,” Dyson replied. “A very bad thing.”

"That word, I don't care who you are, has caused pain." Maher acknowledged. "It doesn’t matter that it wasn’t said in malice," he added, saying his apology was "sincere" and that he's "not that big of an [expletive].”

Maher's entire sit down with Dyson can be watched below:

Warning: Video contains strong language.

Later, hip-hop artist turned actor Ice Cube joined the show and addressed Maher's use of the racial slur.

"When I hear my homies say it, it don’t feel like venom," Ice Cube said, adding: "When I hear a white person say it, it’s like a knife."

Last weekend, Maher issued an apology in which he admitted "the word was offensive" and said that he regretted using it. HBO called the comment "inexcusable and tasteless" and announced they would edit that part out for future airings of the episode.

But the fallout didn't stop. Sen. Al Franken (D-Minn.) canceled his appearance on Friday's episode. He was to have appeared in the same post-monologue, single-guest interview in which Sasse participated.

In an interview that aired Thursday on SiriusXM's Family Politics, Franken, who still considers Maher a friend, said, "He’s been around long enough to know that that’s not a word white people can use. It just is not. And he should have known that. I just didn’t want to sit around for 4-5 days being attacked for going on the show before I went on the show.”

Contributing: Jayme Deerwester