WHY THIS QUESTION MATTERS:

Student loan debt has more than doubled in the last decade, reaching amounts of $1.5 trillion as of the end of March. This increase is driven by the rising cost of tuition and high numbers of young people going to college. In the last two decades, tuition for college has increased from roughly $22,000 to $104,000 for a four year degree (in current dollars). This has led some states to pursue “free-tuition” options.

Most recently, New Mexico announced a plan to make public universities and colleges free for all state residents. While supporters say the New Mexico Opportunity Scholarship will increase access to higher education, opponents say these costly programs will do little to benefit low income students.





LET’S BREAK DOWN STUDENT DEBT BY THE NUMBERS

Students aged 18-29 account for almost 50% of the $1.5 trillion dollars of student debt. This is partially because older individuals have had time to pay off their debts, but also because younger students are far more likely to take out loans for education (18-24 year olds were twice as likely to take out loans in 2015-2016 compared to 1999-2000).

Loan amounts vary depending on degrees obtained, with a median of $25K loan for bachelor’s degree and $45K for post grads. Brookings predicts that 40% of students will default on their loans by 2023. Furthermore, students who attend a 4-year, for-profit college will default at nearly 4 times the rate of other borrowers. To top it off, federal aid and Pell grants, which are awarded to undergraduate students who display exceptional financial need, haven’t been able to keep up with rising tuition costs. The staggering trends in student debt has prompted various policy responses, including state implemented “free” tuition university systems.







“FREE” TUITION PROPOSALS: FIRST DOLLAR v. LAST DOLLAR

Currently, there are roughly 20 states that support a “free” tuition college program — each with varying degree of coverage. However, the same phrase “free-tuition” is being used to discuss many different proposals, so it isn’t always clear what “tuition-free” really means. For example, some programs cover two-year vs. four-year programs, others have family income restrictions or minimum GPA requirements, and some require a community service component. Furthermore, some proposals exclusively cover tuition while others cover other expenses associated with attending school. This difference is also addressed with terms like “first-dollar” and “last-dollar.”

First-Dollar Programs: Offer funding regardless of financial aid or other scholarship sources.

Last-Dollar Programs: Wait until financial aid and scholarship has been paid out and then cover what is left. Often the last dollar approach doesn’t account for the other costs of education (housing, living expenses, textbooks etc).

Middle-Dollar Programs: Mimics the last dollar approach but also guarantees additional funding on top of the cost of tuition to cover these added expenses of education.

The opinion section of this article specifically addresses the New Mexico Opportunity Scholarship. The New Mexico proposal is a last-dollar program. It is unique from other last dollar programs in that there are no caps to family income nor are there any requirements for minimum high school GPA or student achievement. The program is open to New Mexico residents who have earned their high school diploma, a GED, or are returning adult learners. The scholarship would apply to both two-year and four-year higher education.

What do you think?





The Common Thread

Supporters and opponents of the bill both say they want to to promote a cost-effective and fair education system.

FIND YOUR Thread

Supporters argue that free-tuition would be more fair as it would increase access to education and prevent large debt burdens for disadvantaged students. Opponents argue that free-tuition is less fair as benefits primarily go to higher income families and this option just passes the financial burden of college to the taxpayers.