WHY THIS QUESTION MATTERS:

In the last few months, the federal government has passed a series of relief packages to address the far-reaching effects of COVID-19. These packages represent the largest federal stimulus in United States history — including the historic $2 trillion CARES Act. State and local governments are now calling for further relief from the federal government to the tune of half a trillion dollars. Is this a good idea?

We’ll walk through the research from both sides. You decide where you land.





RELIEF TO DATE:

To date, congress has passed three phases of federal relief packages. The first was the ‘Coronavirus Preparedness and Response Supplemental Appropriations Act,’ which provided $8.3 billion in emergency funding to federal agencies to respond to the crisis.

Second was the ‘Families First Coronavirus Response Act,’ which provided an additional $3.5 billion in funding for expanding SNAP food program, additional testing, expanding federal government’s support of Medicare, and expanding emergency family and medical leave.

Most recently was the ‘CARES Act,’ which was by far the largest package to date including over $2.2 trillion in funds. Check out our recent article if you want the breakdown.



To date, these packages are projected to have a colossal effect on the country’s annual deficit. Before COVID-19, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) projected an annual deficit of about $1 trillion for 2020. Now they expect a deficit of $3.7 trillion (which is almost 18% of our GDP).

MORE RELIEF:

Looking ahead, there is a general consensus in Washington that more aid will be needed. But how should this aid be distributed? One increasingly contentious proposal is whether to provide additional stimulus to state and local governments. State and local governments already received $150 billion as part of the CARES Act. However, proponents of additional aid say that these funds did not go far enough. Let's take a look at both sides.

THE COMMON THREAD:

Both sides say that additional relief is needed to support the economy in these unprecedented times.

FIND YOUR THREAD:

Supporters of additional state funding say that support from the federal government is the only way states will be able to continue to provide vital services. Opponents say that funds should go directly to businesses and specific sectors, rather than provide opportunities for states to get bailed out of budget issues incurred before the crisis.

What do you think?