The agreement will extend highway spending authority and the gas tax for about two years. Keystone out of highway deal

Congressional negotiators are on the brink of a deal to extend federal highway funding for two years, ending a four-month push by both chambers and likely wrapping up major legislative business before the July Fourth recess.

The agreement will extend highway spending authority and the gas tax for roughly two years, sources said. But it comes at a price: Republicans had to drop their insistence that President Barack Obama approve the Keystone XL pipeline, and Democrats had to settle for allowing states to opt out of spending some funds on nonroad projects like bike and pedestrian paths. The GOP also rolled back its insistence on curtailing the EPA’s ability to regulate coal ash.

Advertisement

Rep. Bill Shuster of Pennsylvania, a top Republican negotiator on the Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, said the two sides are "really close” to wrapping up an agreement.

"We've got a pretty good agreement, but there's a couple things on the edges we're working on," Shuster told reporters late Wednesday.

Oregon Democratic Rep. Peter DeFazio says Sen. Barbara Boxer (D-Calif.) told him in a phone conversation, “We do have a bill, there is agreement.” DeFazio said he’s been told the text of the bill should be made available this evening and the bill will last through September 2014, a year longer than has been widely expected.

The deal also will help Congress wrap up another thorny issue before leaving for the July Fourth recess: preventing student loan rates from doubling. Leadership will likely marry the two bills for passage late this week.

Obama made highway funding and keeping student loan rates from doubling center in his presidential campaign. This takes both issues off the table

It was a rare moment in Washington: Both sides compromised, and neither side is fully happy with the result. It’s been a long slog: Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio) introduced the highway bill in February, touting it as a way to marry increased oil exploration to building roads. In the end, the House never passed the massive agreement he envisioned, rather a shell bill that was meant as a negotiating vehicle with the Senate.

The result is a mixed bag for Boehner. The eventual deal will not be counted as a massive win for him, but he was able to find agreement on a decent-sized highway bill that could help him — and the institution — shed its do-nothing label. At least for a moment.

But in a sign that both sides are not happy, Democrats and Republicans are both spinning the eventual compromise.

First, Boehner told reporters Wednesday morning that “it is clear that there are significant reforms in this bill, which will reduce the number of programs funded out of the highway bill, streamline the regulatory process and allow us to focus our highway dollars on fixing America’s highways, not planting more flowers around the country.”

The agreement — which was hashed out between leadership, Rep. John Mica (R-Fla.) and Sen. Barbara Boxer (D-Calif.) — was immediately being trumpeted by both sides.

Mica says conferees are expected to begin signing the conference report Wednesday night between 9 and 10.

“At the end of the day, Senate Democrats fought for red tape, while House Republicans fought for jobs — and got some important wins,” a House GOP leadership aide said. “This bill is far from perfect, but it is a substantial improvement over the original Senate bill.”

Boxer commended House Republicans for meeting Democrats “half way, as Senate Republicans did months ago.”

Boxer, in her own predictive statement Wednesday, cited faster project delivery without violating environmental laws and increased biking and pedestrian funding flexibility as victories and said the legislation will preserve or create up to 3 million jobs, a “critical focus of Democrats.”

“Our country needs the kind of economic boost that this bill offers, and I am looking forward to getting it to the president’s desk,” the transportation conference committee chairwoman said in an afternoon statement.

Democrats fought off controversial riders to expedite the Keystone XL crude oil pipeline and block regulation of coal ash — both important environmental issues to Boxer, who chairs the Environment and Public Works Committee.

This article first appeared on POLITICO Pro at 5:29 p.m. on June 27, 2012.

This article tagged under: EPA

Highways

Keystone XL