In 2007, when he left the Marine Corps at age 21, Alex was offered anti-anxiety medicines by the VA doctors. He declined the pharmaceuticals. “I’d seen so many people get hooked on medications,” he remembers. Instead, he got hooked on alcohol, drinking a bottle of vodka a day. “I wanted to forget,” he told me in a recent phone interview. “I wanted to move forward.” But his excessive drinking caused pancreatitis, a potentially fatal inflammation of the pancreas. It took him about a year to stop drinking, at which time he switched over to cannabis and started growing his own. It was legal at the time in his county, but is now illegal in California for people looking to grow more than six plants outdoors.

Theoretically, a veteran caught by law enforcement using California’s illicit cannabis market faces little more than a small fine. But given the federal laws against marijuana, a veteran in that situation could find his or her status with the VA in question. And veterans who openly use cannabis, even in cannabis-legal states, in the words of the Military Times, “commonly run into challenges” when trying to find employment.

Even as marijuana legalization continues to expand across the country (33 states have some form of legal marijuana on their books and well-known former politicians have becomes spokesmen for the cannabis industry), many of the nation’s 18.2 million veterans occupy an uncomfortable limbo between rapidly liberalizing cultural attitudes and an unbending federal standard that hasn’t changed since the 1970s. Veterans looking for alternatives to addictive and dangerous opioids and other pharmaceuticals are effectively prevented from using marijuana, by price, policy and quite often the ongoing stigma that marijuana still carries.

Veterans groups are beginning to make themselves heard on this subject in Washington. In 2016, the American Legion, the nation’s largest veterans organization and a group known for its conservative politics, urged Congress to remove marijuana from its list of prohibited drugs. It also called on the U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency to allow privately funded medical marijuana producers to take part in “safe and efficient cannabis drug research development.” Currently, a handful of bills that would promote veterans’ access to medical marijuana have passed the House.

Dale Schafer, a Vietnam-era Navy veteran, who spent five years in federal prison for growing medical marijuana at home, serves as a legal counsel for the Weed for Warriors Project, a nonprofit cannabis advocacy organization for veterans with chapters in politically consequential states such as Florida, Nevada, Wisconsin and California. Schafer notes that the cost of cannabis on the state-legal markets is still too high for most veterans.

“The legal market is not targeting veterans, especially disabled veterans who live on fixed incomes,” he says. “It’s targeting people with a lot more disposable income.”

WFWP President Sean Kiernan says a 100 percent-disabled veteran receives around $3,000 a month in VA disability payments. If that veteran goes to a legal dispensary, Kiernan says, they will need to spend about $50 a day to medicate.