Our spring issue, “ Pandemic Politics ,” is out now. It features over 120 pages of beautiful illustrations and quality writing and analysis. Get a discounted subscription today !

The past week’s protests, and Donald Trump’s and other Republicans’ despotic response to them, make electoral defeat for the president and his party a more urgent priority than ever. But there is a real danger that well-meaning liberals — taught by cable news and other Democratic Party authorities that Trump is the fountainhead of all that is wrong with the country and that Joe Biden his antithesis — will end up pulling the lever for Democrats, then will promptly go to brunch for four years, laying the groundwork for something even more dangerous to come. As Trump careened between threats and obscene photo ops, Biden gave a well-written speech on Tuesday about the president’s behavior, the protests, racism, and what he plans to do in his first year, earning him plaudits and a flood of donations. “As unrest grips the U.S., Trump fuels a fire Biden pledges to extinguish,” wrote NBC news. “Trump just threatened to have looters shot. Biden urged calm. That says it all,” said the Washington Post. If only it did. US political commentary tends to obsess over speeches and symbolic gestures, so these headlines are not surprising. Nor is it exceptional in the scope of the last four years, where much of the press has used the subterranean lows of Trump as a benchmark by which to judge every other political figure, no matter how repugnant. And let’s give Biden credit for still ably playing the calm, measured TV president, at least when relegated to a teleprompter, and so long as it doesn’t malfunction. But look past the compassionate words and well-staged, solemn imagery, and there are good reasons to believe passing the baton from Trump to Biden isn’t going to result in any profound change when the next uprising comes — which, between the pandemic, a historic depression, looming food shortages, and the ongoing ravages of climate change, it will certainly do. In fact, if tens of millions of liberals simply switch off and fail to resist the next presidency with the fervor they brought to Trump’s four years, it could end up much worse.

Bad Boys Unfortunately, that’s not all. As part of his criminal justice platform, Biden plans to “reinvigorate community-oriented policing.” How? By pumping $300 million into the Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS) program. This is fitting, because COPS was originally a Joe Biden joint, launched by the 1994 crime bill he authored for craven electoral reasons (it would “maintain crime as a Democratic initiative” and “control the agenda” through the 1994 midterms, as an unearthed memo put it). It put tens of thousands of new police on the streets at the cost of nearly $9 billion over five years. According to one comprehensive study, not only did it fail to meaningfully change police practices on the whole, but it “had little to no effect on crime” — though it did succeed in putting more people into prisons and putting such pressure on municipal budgets in the long term that cities and towns resorted to heavy ticketing to cover the new officers’ salaries. It was Biden who worked again and again in the decade after launching COPS to put more money into the program, often against the wishes of Republicans who tried to defund it. Speaking at the National Sheriffs’ Association conference in 2005, Biden criticized George W. Bush’s former attorney general, John Ashcroft, for calling for the program’s elimination. “You hear anybody say, any serious person say, that our investment in local law enforcement at a federal level over the last decade has been a failure?” Biden asked sarcastically. “Heard anybody make the case that giving you more shields has not helped your effort?” “There is never a time, absent a decrease in population, where you can justify spending less money on crime than you spent the year before,” Biden told the assembled sheriffs. His 1994 crime bill, he boasted, was the way it was because he had given them carte blanche to craft it. “Your counterparts, your predecessors, [were] sitting at that table in my conference room for days upon days upon days to draft that legislation,” he told them. “And that is not hyperbole . . . That bill was written by cops and sheriffs.” As his words suggest, Biden viewed mollifying police as key to his political career. After Los Angeles officers viciously beat Rodney King in 1991, Biden quickly introduced a Law Enforcement Officers’ Bill of Rights act to restrict investigations into police misconduct. He objected to a provision in an anti-terrorism bill for a commission to study the actions of federal law enforcement, drafted in the wake of high-profile cases of law enforcement misconduct like Waco, calling it “pandering to this concern of some Americans that the bad guys are the cops,” and “a forum for those who believe that federal law enforcement is the enemy of the American people and not the protectors.” A year after his crime bill passed, Biden did the rounds of local police departments to talk up the bill in advance of his reelection campaign, as delighted police chiefs gushed to him how they now only needed to fill out a one-page form to get more federal money for their departments. Little has changed. Biden has continued to vehemently defend his crime bill, claiming it “restored American cities” and that people have merely “been conditioned to say” it was bad. He spent much of his train-wreck interview with Charlamagne tha God defending the bill, just days before the world watched its miserable legacy take over American streets. As out-of-control police waylaid protesters and journalists, Biden, unshackled from a teleprompter, shared one of his reform ideas: train police to shoot people in the legs, an idea so untethered to reality that even the National Review chided its danger. “More police officers meet the higher standards of their procession [sic],” Biden urged on Tuesday. “Most of them do it.” Forget for a moment Biden’s typically weird syntax and the fact that he said “procession” when he meant “profession.” His quick insistence that “most of them do it” is a signal that we’re not dealing with someone fundamentally different than he was in the bad old days of the ’90s. Not that it matters. The police are already furious with Biden, charging him with moving too far left. We’ll see if he holds out or buckles as the race goes on. But currently, he’s in no man’s land: angering both conservatives and the police, and doing so with inadequate measures that will leave the most vocal parts of his left flank unsatisfied.