The backlash from the right comes even as many conservatives begin to accept the premise that African Americans are disproportionately targeted by police. A recent Washington Post-Schar School poll found that 53 percent of Republicans backed the protests, and 47 percent believed police killings of black men indicate broader problems, compared with 19 percent in 2014.

But Trump’s die-hard conservative base is unnerved by what they view as an extreme solution from extreme leftists. To them, addressing the problem by slashing resources to law enforcement is an attack on the central tenet of the Republican Party — law and order — and one that Trump himself is setting up as a wedge issue to bolster his case for reelection in the coming months.

“First of all, on some level, I think it's perceived to be more of an empty slogan than a serious policy response,” said Clark Neily, vice president for criminal justice at the libertarian-leaning Cato Institute. “And second, it is indelibly associated with the left, which for many people is all they need to know about it in order to oppose it.”

Initially, conservatives across the country — Trump supporters or not — dismissed the idea as an impossibility as slogans like “Defund the Police” and “Abolish the Police” first appeared on signs during Black Lives Matter protests. The slogan morphed virtually overnight from liberal fever dream to tangible policy when the Minneapolis City Council voted overwhelmingly to disband the city’s police department and restructure its approach to public safety.

The concept of defunding the police, as proponents of the movement explain it, is straightforward: Redirect police budgets toward programs addressing broader community needs such as mental health care, housing for the homeless and crime prevention. Further along the spectrum is the idea of either disbanding or abolishing the police force altogether, replacing first responders instead with social workers, mental health providers, and other community figures. At the core of these ideas is the belief that the initial set of reforms widely adopted by police in the wake of the Ferguson protests in 2014 — implicit bias training, body cameras and community engagement — were not sufficiently effective.

In the immediate wake of George Floyd’s death in Minneapolis, there is little recent polling on what Republicans and other conservatives believe may be the best path toward police reform, made even murkier by the fact that even pro-reform activists in Minneapolis are still grappling with a tangible plan for a post-police world.

But one thing is clear. “I don't think it makes sense to replace professional police officers with decades of training, to have citizens do it. And then to abolish police in general — like just completely get rid of the police — is getting rid of the justice system altogether,” said Brandon Tatum, a former Arizona police officer, pro-Trump commentator and a founder of the Blexit Foundation, which seeks to persuade black voters to stop voting primarily for Democrats.

“You have the lawmakers to write the laws, you have the police to enforce them,” Tatum said. “And you have the court that ensures people have constitutional protections and due process. They don't have a legitimate argument. It sounds like people are just talking and virtue signaling and not really coming up with an effective conclusion.”