Donald Trump grew testy during the final presidential debate Wednesday night when the topic turned to Russia’s alleged interference in the U.S. election. “[Hillary Clinton] has no idea whether it’s Russia, China, or anybody else,” Trump said, referring to a series of cyber-attacks that resulted in WikiLeaks releasing thousands of e-mails belonging to the Democratic National Convention and, more recently, Clinton campaign chair John Podesta. “Our country has no idea.” In fact, 17 different intelligence agencies have all concluded that Russia was behind the hacks, as Clinton pointed out. But the high-profile security breach was hardly a Mission Impossible–style operation. Instead, a new report suggests, Podesta unwittingly handed over his e-mail password when he fell for one of the oldest tricks in the hacker playbook.

SecureWorks, a security firm looking into the hackings, told Motherboard that Podesta had fallen prey to a common phishing attack set up by a Russian hacking ring known as Fancy Bear. According to Motherboard, the group had sent several members of Clinton’s inner-circle e-mails in March with a custom Bitly link leading to a fake Gmail login page. Podesta had clicked on the link and entered his password, thus giving the hackers unfettered access to his account.

Fancy Bear, which is also known as APT28 and Sofacy, was also allegedly behind a similar attack on the D.N.C. last summer. Writing for Esquire, King’s College professor Thomas Rid explained how the group made its “gravest mistake” by forgetting to set the Bitly links to private, thus allowing investigators to see whom else the group had targeted. “Among the group’s recent breaches were the German parliament, the Italian military, the Saudi foreign ministry, the e-mail accounts of Philip Breedlove, Colin Powell, and John Podesta—Hillary Clinton’s campaign chairman—and, of course, the DNC,” he wrote.

It is widely believed that the Russian government is sponsoring the attacks, and disseminating the information to Clinton’s foes, including WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange. “There is no longer any doubt that Putin is trying to help Donald Trump by weaponizing WikiLeaks,” a Clinton spokesman said in a statement Thursday.

The threat of Russian espionage has become one of the key issues in the 2016 election—not just because it reveals critical weaknesses in America’s cyber-security, but also because it highlights how Russia has sought to tilt the presidential election in favor of Donald Trump. And John Podesta, for one, is not making matters easier. One hopes that the next time the 67-year-old former chief of staff to Bill Clinton and Barack Obama receives an e-mail with a funny-looking link, he thinks twice before clicking.