“Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has notified Congress that the Trump administration no longer regards Hong Kong as autonomous from mainland China… Pompeo’s certification comes amid calls in Congress and elsewhere for the U.S. and others to react against Beijing’s move to impose Chinese national security laws over the territory.” AP News



Both sides condemn China and call on the US and its allies to take action:



“A national security law in itself is not necessarily a problem. Every country has a responsibility to protect its national security. But this should never be at the expense of fundamental rights and freedoms… The proposed law as it stands is a flagrant violation of Hong Kong’s obligations as a signatory to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. As the last governor of Hong Kong Chris Patten says, it is ‘a comprehensive assault on the city’s autonomy, rule of law and fundamental freedoms’...



“Even worse than introducing this controversial law — which drew 500,000 people onto the streets the last time it was attempted in 2003 — is the idea of ramming it through via the national people’s congress, completely bypassing — and thus fatally neutering — Hong Kong’s legislative council. It makes a mockery of any remaining pretense of the ‘high degree of autonomy’ promised by the Joint Declaration.”

Benedict Rogers, Spectator USA



“Chinese officials claim the law is meant to target the alleged ‘foreign influence’ China says is driving the unrest in Hong Kong. But that is largely disinformation; China has blamed outsiders for fueling violence in Hong Kong to deny the grassroots resistance. The reality is that the law is very clearly targeted as a catchall against dissent and anyone challenging Beijing’s authority. China has, at least rhetorically, honored the ‘one country, two systems’ rule. In practice, though, it has sought greater and greater control over Hong Kong. The national security law is merely a much more direct and obvious step toward what Beijing has been trying to accomplish for years: one country, one system.”

Jen Kirby, Vox



“The proposed measure is extremely concerning not just because the specifics are likely to be vague and overbroad in language, exposing pro-democracy activists in Hong Kong to increased and more severe persecution, but because Article 23 also calls for measures banning any ‘foreign political organization’ from operating in Hong Kong. This could push out any remaining international observers, eliminating global attention on Hong Kong's fight for freedom…



“It is clear that Xi Jinping has grown tired of pretending Hong Kong has any kind of autonomy. Under his leadership, the CCP will try to cut Hong Kong off from the international community so that its pro-democracy movement loses steam, giving the Chinese government more space to end the city's already-declining freedom.”

Joy Park, CNN



“The proposed national-security bill not only reveals that the CCP cannot be trusted to honor its international agreements. The bigger story is Mr. Xi’s willingness to aggressively move against any potential separatist movements, regardless of international law or morality. Beijing’s move to take over Hong Kong cannot be separated from its stamping out of Chinese civil society, as well as its brutal crackdowns in Xinjiang and Tibet…



“While Washington’s direct options are limited, China should be forced to veto a UN Security Council resolution condemning its abrogation of Hong Kong’s Basic Law. Travel bans on high-ranking CCP officials and military officers should also be considered, especially if violence is used against any new demonstrations, as should further sanctions on technology transfer to China. Finally, once the law is passed by Beijing, Washington should offer immediate asylum to Hong Kong’s democratic leaders, as well as to prominent academics, business leaders, artists, and the like, who will be most at risk.”

Michael Auslin, National Review



Other opinions below.