“Thousands of people in Hong Kong defied a police ban Thursday evening, breaking through barricades to hold a candlelight vigil on the 31st anniversary of China’s crushing of a democracy movement centered on Beijing’s Tiananmen Square… Earlier Thursday, the Hong Kong legislature passed a law making it a crime to disrespect China’s national anthem.” AP News



Last Friday, “U.S. President Donald Trump said… he was directing his administration to begin the process of eliminating special treatment for Hong Kong, in response to China’s plans to impose new security legislation in the territory.” Reuters



See our prior coverage of Hong Kong here. The Flip Side



Both sides urge the US to stand with Hong Kong and take action against China:



After the Tiananmen Square massacre, “International condemnation was swift, sanctions were imposed, and the Chinese leadership was treated as a pariah, for a little while. But while President George H.W. Bush publicly condemned the massacre, privately he quickly and quietly resumed his drive to pursue friendly relations with Beijing, signaling to Chinese leaders their brutal crackdown would have little long-term cost. Economic engagement quickly resumed, most sanctions were soon lifted and China’s economy surged for the next three decades…



“The Bush administration could be forgiven for thinking China’s leaders were moving toward opening and reform in 1989. In 2020, nobody can make that argument. The CCP has abused its access to the international economy for economic aggression while protecting its own markets from free competition. China’s internal repression has blossomed into wholesale ethnic cleansing of Uighurs and other ethnic Muslim minorities, severe repression of millions of Tibetans and the snuffing out of any space for political dissent… The world failed after Tiananmen Square. We must not fail Hong Kong now.”

Josh Rogin, Washington Post



“Hong Kong is the new frontline in a clash of value systems—a clash about to be lost if the free world does not act immediately, robustly and in unity… Along with seizing its opportunity in the current crisis, Beijing also learned from the tepid global response to Vladimir Putin’s conquest of Crimea in 2014. China has far more geopolitical leverage than Russia and clearly doesn’t believe the international community has the will or ability to deter it from this latest crackdown…



“The free world must stop kowtowing to this mendacious, brutal regime whose duplicity led to a global pandemic with untold impact… This is a battle between two contrasting visions of the future—freedom, openness, the rule of law and human rights, represented by the Hong Kong of yesterday, and deception and vicious repression, represented by the Chinese regime that seeks to impose its will on the Hong Kong of today. We must act, at least if we still believe in freedom half as much as the brave Hongkongers risking their lives for it.”

Garry Kasparov, The Bulwark



Other opinions below.