WASHINGTON — Congressional campaign coffers in Texas continue to fill up at a torrid pace — tallying more than $62 million last year — and candidates are wasting no time spending that bounty as the critical March primary approaches.

Those trends, apparent in a Dallas Morning News analysis of campaign finance data, reinforce the Lone Star State’s newfound status as a battleground.

Texas, for years, featured a U.S. House map filled mostly with sleepy, low-cost races, some even involving no challengers at all. But high-dollar skirmishes have now cropped up all over, thanks to real competition in growing suburban areas and a half-dozen open seats across the state.

Amid broader signs that the GOP’s decadeslong grip on the state could be slipping, both parties are gearing up for an expensive 2020.

“We broke the back of apathy in our party,” said Bunni Pounds, a longtime Dallas GOP consultant who last cycle made an unsuccessful run for Congress. “Members who thought they could just coast are no longer just coasting.”

By any measure, Texas is flush with congressional cash.

U.S. House races brought in 37% more money in 2019 compared with 2017, the same period in the last election cycle. In Texas’ eight tightest races, the tally nearly doubled. All across the state, nearly 20 candidates have raised at least $1 million — about triple from 2017.

House candidates’ spending, meanwhile, increased almost 35%, while outside groups have so far made a threefold increase in their independent investments in Texas congressional races.

That largesse is most prominent in the Houston area, but it’s also showing up in North Texas and other locales. Much of it is focused on potential swing districts, but safer seats are also seeing a surge. Both Republicans and Democrats are raising and spending millions more dollars.

And it’s all happening at a time when top-of-the-ticket battles also have the attention of donors in Texas and beyond.

“It’s so challenging for these candidates because there’s a U.S. Senate race and then the presidential,” said Lillian Salerno, a Dallas Democratic consultant and co-host of a podcast called “Pod Bless Texas.” “But we still have so many people engaged and invested in winning these districts.”

The mountains of moolah — $22.4 million in the fourth quarter of last year alone — come after the 2018 election in Texas produced a gusher in its own right.

Former El Paso Rep. Beto O’Rourke, a Democrat, shattered national fundraising records in his Senate battle against Republican Sen. Ted Cruz, who also raised huge sums of money. That fervor spread to other races, including at the congressional level.

Two longtime GOP seats, including one in Dallas, flipped after costly campaigns, while a host of other traditionally red districts ended up being far more competitive than expected.

“Chalk a lot of that up to the Beto effect,” said Jenifer Sarver, an Austin political consultant who last cycle unsuccessfully ran for Congress as a Republican. “He certainly … generated enthusiasm on the left like we’ve never seen.”

The question going into the 2020 cycle, then, was whether the last election was a blip or the new normal. The early returns are clear.

“People finally realize that Texas is more than an ATM,” North Texas Democratic consultant Chelsea Roe said, referring to the long-standing practice of candidates from outside Texas swooping into the Lone Star State only for infusions of campaign cash.

Both parties have made the state a priority at the congressional level, with groups like the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee going so far as to open up offices in Texas.

Democrats have circled six GOP districts as pickup opportunities. Among them is the seat being vacated by Rep. Kenny Marchant of Coppell. Republicans, meanwhile, are fighting to take back the two seats they lost. Among them is the one now belonging to Rep. Colin Allred of Dallas.

Both parties, accordingly, are seeing a financial windfall for U.S. House races.

Republicans and Democrats running for Congress in Texas each raised at least $8 million more last year than in 2017. The increase is more pronounced on the Democratic side because that party holds fewer seats in Texas. But the tit-for-tat can’t be ignored.

“Republicans are having to be on defense, when they are usually on offense,” said Roe, who works with state and federal candidates, including Fort Worth Rep. Marc Veasey. “That’s something we haven’t seen for decades.”

A bevy of open seats has only added to the bonanza, even in cases in which the district will not be competitive in the general election.

Take the ruby red West Texas seat represented by retiring Midland Rep. Mike Conaway. A dozen Republicans have lined up for the March primary, with one candidate, Air Force veteran August Pfluger, already raising a staggering $1.2 million.

But the real action is taking place in potential swing districts, particularly in suburban swaths outside Houston, Dallas and Austin.

Contests involving Houston Rep. Lizzie Fletcher, a Democratic freshman, and Houston Rep. Dan Crenshaw, a Republican freshman, have each brought in more than $5 million. In North Texas, Allred’s race has drawn $3.8 million, while Marchant’s open seat has produced $3.4 million.

It’s unclear exactly how much of those hauls are coming from donors inside Texas or out. Federal Election Commission data only record that kind of detailed information for those who give at least $200, making it hard to pinpoint increasingly influential small-dollar donors.

In all likelihood, the surge is originating at home and from afar.

Candidates like Gina Ortiz Jones — a Democrat running to replace retiring Rep. Will Hurd, R-San Antonio — have indeed raised gobs of money from out of state. She and others are far from ignoring the Lone Star State, though, whose reputation for political giving is well-known.

The pressure to raise lots of money — and early — is intense.

Pounds, the Dallas-based GOP consultant, noted that “without paid advertising, nobody knows your name, nobody knows what you’re standing for.” For candidates preparing to face off in a contested primary in March, that necessity means working the fundraising circuit far in advance.

It’s no easy task.

Salerno, who also ran an unsuccessful U.S. House campaign last cycle in Dallas, said many potential congressional candidates are simply put off by the prospect of spending a “mind-numbing 25 hours a week calling friends and relatives to give you money.”

To keep up, many candidates are self-funding or loaning money to their campaigns. In the race to replace retiring Rep. Bill Flores, R-Bryan, for instance, a half-dozen contenders have either given or loaned funds to themselves to help boost their reserves.

(That phenomenon isn’t altogether new. Of the $45.4 million collected by House candidates in 2017, $6.7 million came via loans and self-funding. In 2019, that type of funding accounted for about $6.1 million of the overall $62.4 million total.)

Outside groups are also chipping in with what are known as independent expenditures, totaling more than $4 million to date on advertisements and other assistance.

That activity has been most prolific in two districts where entrenched incumbents are fending off tough primary challengers. Rep. Kay Granger, R-Fort Worth, is battling tech executive Chris Putnam, while Rep. Henry Cuellar, D-Laredo, is going against attorney Jessica Cisneros.

Such an avalanche of cash — campaign-affiliated and not — may end up cutting more than one way.

Sarver, the Austin-based consultant, said the high-dollar sums, particularly from dark-money groups, could end up elbowing out worthy candidates. But she said the plus side is the increased fundraising also likely reflects that “voters are incredibly engaged on both sides of the aisle.”

“We’re going to see increased participation across the board,” she predicted.