Chilling video captured a Texas police officer fatally shooting a woman moments after she yelled, “I’m pregnant!” while fighting for the cop’s Taser.

The woman was not pregnant, cops said Tuesday.

Grandmother of three Pamela Turner, 44, was shown on the video struggling to resist arrest for outstanding warrants outside an apartment complex in Baytown on Monday night, KPRC Click2Houston reported.

“You’re actually harassing me,” she yells at the unidentified officer, telling him angrily, “I’m actually walking to my house.”

The shaky footage then catches the cop firing his Taser and continuing to struggle to arrest her on the ground as she yells, “I’m pregnant!”

Five shots ring out, killing her, with police saying at least one bullet hit her in the face, according to the Dallas Morning News.

Authorities said Turner was wanted on warrants for assault and criminal mischief and that the officer knew her from previous interactions.

He tried to arrest her Monday, Baytown police Lt. Steve Dorris said, and a “struggle ensued.

“During the course of the attempted arrest, the female began struggling with the officer, which forced the officer to deploy his Taser,” Dorris said, according to KPRC.

When he tried to handcuff her, she grabbed the weapon and turned it back on the officer, he said.

“[She] actually tased the officer, which forced the officer to draw his duty weapon and fire multiple rounds at the suspect,” Dorris said.

He said his office had confirmed Turner was not pregnant but did not elaborate on how it knew. Autopsy results have not been released.

Turner’s sister, Antoinette, told KPRC that her sibling — who has two children in their 20s as well as three grandkids — was on medication for schizophrenia.

Witnesses told the station that Turner was “not a bad person” and she would “just walk around, smoke her cigarettes and walk her dogs.”

Court records show she did have three outstanding warrants, according to the station — two for criminal mischief and another for assault resulting in bodily injury.

Police say they want to talk to whoever took the video because they are key witnesses.

“It’s unfortunate that somebody takes a tragic incident like this and posts it on social media,” Dorris said, according to KPRC. “It’s extremely disrespectful for everybody involved, but that’s the day and age we live in with social media.”

He added, “It’s a tragic event for everybody involved. Of course, our hearts go out to the family of the deceased as well as our officer.”

With Post wires