With every election cycle comes cries from Democratic politicians about voter ID laws suppressing the black vote. But Fox News' Ami Horowitz recently spoke with African Americans in Harlem who called that assertion nothing short of "very, very ignorant" and even "racist."

The "Ami on the Street" filmmaker started out in liberal Berkeley, California, speaking with college students about why they believe voter ID laws hurt black voter turnout. Needless to say, they all thought using an ID to vote was suppressive.

"I think voter ID laws are a way to perpetuate racism," one student told Horowitz.

But it was the specific reasons why the Berkeley students thought the laws were racist that was perplexing. One man said black people are "less likely to have" state IDs and another said "these type of people" don't have "easy access" to DMVs.

"Well, I feel like they don't have the knowledge of how it works," one students said when Horowitz mentioned that it is possible to get an ID online. "For most of the communities," she continued, "they don't really know what is out there just because they're not aware or they're not informed."

After talking with white, college-aged students, Horowitz crossed the country to Harlem to see what black people thought about the perspective some of their liberal brethren have of them. Hint: They didn't like it.

"Why would they think we don't have ID?" one woman asked.

"That's a lie. Why would they say that?" another asked after Horowitz told her some believe black voters don't have access to ID services.

And yet another man said: "Everybody I know have [sic] ID. Like, that's one of the things you need to walk around New York with — an ID."

Long story short, all of the black Harlem residents Horowitz spoke with carried an ID and thought it was bizarre someone would suggest otherwise. Two men even told the Fox personality exactly where the DMV was, should they need to renew their IDs.

"That's just stupidity, honestly. Everybody has access to the internet, even a little kid can figure out how to work the internet," one black young man said of the suggestion that black voters' access to the web is limited.

Another woman said it is "a little racist" to suggest voter ID laws suppress the black vote because they don't have access to or knowledge of ID services.

"Because, you know, you're putting people in a category and you have no idea what you're talking about," she said.

Watch the full video below: