During a recent conversation with Breitbart News, Black Guns Matter (BGM) founder Maj Toure explained that gun control is one of the tools Democrats use to keep urban residents dependent on government.

Regarding Chicago’s South Side, Baltimore’s inner city, and other similar, Democrat-run areas, Toure said:

There are people deliberately trying to make the urban demographic poor, uneducated, and dependent on government. The people doing this know that more dependence means more control. And that’s not a theory. That’s actually what happens. The unfortunate part is when elected officials are doing it, they are sometimes getting a check on the back end. And they see the violence but think, “Well, I don’t live over there so it doesn’t matter.”

Toure stressed that gun control plays a role in creating this dependence. He said the urban demographic is kept in the dark about their Second Amendment rights “by design.” Therefore, it is “not an accident” that residents on Chicago’s South Side or Baltimore’s inner city associate guns with crime rather than self-defense and freedom. They are not told about their rights in hopes of making them increasingly dependent on the government for protection.

He said this hunger for control runs so deep that if an urban black resident begins to suspect he has rights — like those protected by the Second Amendment — the peddlers of dependence dissuade him from believing it. Toure said, “The other side has vision. That’s why they don’t tell the ‘hood, ‘Hey, this is your natural born right; it’s in the Constitution.’ They’d rather tell people in the black community, ‘Oh, when that was written it wasn’t for you, you weren’t citizens then.'”

Toure responds by saying, “Well, I wasn’t alive when that was written, but I’m a citizen now. So those rights belong to me as well.”

AWR Hawkins is the Second Amendment columnist for Breitbart News and political analyst for Armed American Radio. Follow him on Twitter: @AWRHawkins. Reach him directly at awrhawkins@breitbart.com.