Bruce Springsteen, Ringo Starr, and Pearl Jam fired the initial salvos in North Carolina’s transgender bathroom bill drama. Now, the Department of Justice has made a call too—the bill violates the Civil Rights Act (via Associated Press):

A North Carolina law limiting protections to LGBT people violates federal civil rights laws and can't be enforced, the U.S. Justice Department said Wednesday, putting the state on notice that it is in danger of being sued and losing hundreds of millions of dollars in federal funding. The law, which requires transgender people to use public bathrooms that conform to the sex on their birth certificate, has been broadly condemned by gay-rights groups, businesses and entertainers. Some have relocated offices or canceled shows in the state. Several other states have proposed similar laws in recent months limiting protections to lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people. In a letter to Gov. Pat McCrory, the Justice Department said federal officials view the state law as violating federal Civil Rights Act protections barring workplace discrimination based on sex. Provisions of the state law directed at transgender state employees violate their anti-discrimination protections, the letter said. "The State is engaging in a pattern or practice of discrimination against transgender state employees and both you, in your official capacity, and the state are engaging in a pattern or practice of resistance" of their rights, the letter said.

I really don’t see what the problem is with this bill. It’s as if no one on the political left actually read it. It does not strip protections from anyone, businesses can adopt their own nondiscrimination standards (or honor the ones currently on the books), and they are free to establish single occupancy bathrooms. Local governments can also adopt stricter anti-discrimination codes for their employees. What about those transgender persons who have undergone a sex change? The law states that you must use the restrooms that correspond with the gender on your birth certificate, which can be changed if someone in the trans community has successfully undergone the procedure.

So, what’s the problem here? No protections are being undercut, businesses and localities are free to accept the current nondiscrimination standards on the books, or adopt new, stricter standards. This appears to be just another political stunt to satisfy the blood thirst with left-wingers on this issue.

Concerning image, it also doesn’t help that a transwoman seems to have lied about being confronted by a custodian at a Transit Center in North Carolina for using the woman’s bathroom. The transgender woman planned on taking a selfie inside. She claims to have been escorted out by security, which was a humiliating experience. The problem is that the security camera footage doesn’t show her being escorted out. When confronted, she pretty much said you just had to be there. That’s not how this works.

The possible loss of federal funds will surely hurt North Carolina’s economy, which has been the fastest growing since 2013. All of this because North Carolina decided to give their residents a sense of privacy in the restroom areas, in order to prevent some male creepers have dressed as women in order to record unsuspecting females in those facilities. Again, no rights were stripped from transgender people; the same protections that existed then, exist now. Birth certificates can be changed. Lastly, it seems progressives are all for bashing North Carolina’s law, and others that make sure people with gender-specific anatomy use the restrooms that are meant for them, until a man not wearing a wig says he’s going to use the ladies room. You see the discomfort in their faces and prolonged silence, as MRCTV’s Dan Joseph demonstrated in this video.