North Korea said it is willing to talk to the United States about abandoning its nuclear weapons program if its security can be guaranteed, South Korea's government said Tuesday.

If confirmed, the move would mark a significant departure from North Korea's previous stance on its nuclear program and give momentum to South Korea's efforts to bring the United States and North Korea together for talks.

The North said it would stop testing nuclear weapons and missiles for the duration of any "candid talks" it may hold with Washington.

In a tweet Tuesday, President Trump said the announcement signaled "possible progress" in efforts to get North Korea to discuss its nuclear program.

"For the first time in many years, a serious effort is being made by all parties concerned. The World is watching and waiting! May be false hope, but the U.S. is ready to go hard in either direction!" he wrote.

The Trump administration has said it will need to see "concrete steps" toward denuclearization before agreeing to talks, but has not specified what those steps might be.

North Korea has not yet confirmed the South's claim that it is willing to talk. North Korea has not communicated about the proposal directly with Washington, but U.S. and South Korea officials have been in regular communications about the delegation's trip to North Korea.

The announcement in the South's capital came as the two Koreas also said North Korean leader Kim Jong Un has agreed to meet South Korean President Moon Jae-in at the end of April for a summit to discuss denuclearization.

The meeting, only the third ever between the leaders of the two countries, will be held in the demilitarized zone, a border area that has divided the two nations since 1953. The countries also agreed to set up a telephone hotline between their leaders.

More:South Korean officials meet with Kim Jong Un for 1st time, but it's unlikely to solve issues

More:There are nearly 16,000 nuclear weapons in the world — and Russia, U.S. hold more than 90%

More:War vs. diplomacy: Did Olympics help resolve the North Korea nuclear standoff? Sort of.

The apparent diplomatic breakthrough came after the first ever high-level meeting between Kim and a South Korean delegation Monday in the North's capital, Pyongyang.

South Korea’s presidential national security director, Chung Eui-yong, who attended the meeting, said Kim's regime signaled it would not need to keep its nuclear weapons if military threats against the country are resolved and it receives a credible security guarantee, Yonhap reported.

The White House has previously ruled out direct talks with North Korea unless it fully commits to abandoning its nuclear weapons program. Since taking office, Trump has threatened to attack North Korea, exchanged unprecedented insults with Kim and imposed tough sanctions.

Trump has also presided over a diplomatic rapprochement between the rival Koreas that started in the run-up to the Olympics in South Korea last month.

In another tweet Tuesday accompanying a link to a Drudge Report article that Kim was hosting the delegation from Seoul, Trump wrote: "We will see what happens!"