Turn on the TV these days and you are bound to catch one of the Cuomo brothers inveighing against the “selfish.” Chris Cuomo on CNN harangues any one who dares suggest that America restart its economy, while Andrew Cuomo delivers lectures on the importance of staying home lest one expose the elderly to illness. Both brothers have inherited their father’s penchant for high and moralistic rhetoric. They have also inherited his incoherent moral philosophy.

Mario Cuomo was given to flowery denunciations on many subjects, but not abortion. There he would fall silent and simply say that he is “personally opposed” to it. His sons don’t even maintain that conceit. Andrew and Chris are both personally and publicly supportive of abortion.

Recall Andrew’s comment that pro-lifers don’t even belong in New York: “Who are they? Are they these extreme conservatives who are right-to-life, pro-assault-weapon and anti-gay? Is that who they are? Because if that’s who they are, and they’re the extreme conservatives, they have no place in the state of New York, because that’s not who New Yorkers are.”

Last year, he signed into law the most liberal abortion law in the country. “Today we are taking a giant step forward in the hard-fought battle to ensure a woman’s right to make her own decisions about her own personal health, including the ability to access an abortion,” Cuomo said. “With the signing of this bill, we are sending a clear message that whatever happens in Washington, women in New York will always have the fundamental right to control their own body.”

After passage of the law, he ordered, “I am directing that New York’s landmarks be lit in pink to celebrate this achievement and shine a bright light forward for the rest of the nation to follow.”

Part of his justification for abortion rights is that women need them in order to have careers. In other words, he is perfectly willing to sacrifice unborn children for the perceived economic good of women — a line of reasoning that he rejects in the case of the elderly. At a press conference this week, he said he would not put the “elderly at risk” in order to “boost the economy.” He said, “That’s not who we are.”

Actually, it is. New York is responsible for many of the abortions in America today.

“My mother is not expendable and your mother is not expendable and our brothers and sisters are not expendable, and we’re not going to accept a premise that human life is disposable, and we’re not going to put a dollar figure on human life,” Cuomo said this week. “You can do both but not in a clumsy, ham-handed way. ‘Well, we’ll just sacrifice old people; they’re old people anyway and the old get left behind.’ What is this? Some modern Darwinian theory of natural selection? You can’t keep up so the band is going to leave you behind? God forbid.”

Cuomo would never extend this ethic of life to the unborn. He finds them highly “expendable.”