President Trump Donald John TrumpProtesters tear down, burn statue of Confederate general in DC US attorney in NYC who spearheaded probes of Trump allies refuses to leave as DOJ pushes ouster Trump to host 4th of July event despite pleas from lawmakers to cancel MORE on Monday hammered the media after The New York Times issued a correction to a report that included a sexual assault allegation against Supreme Court Justice Brett Kavanaugh Brett Michael KavanaughActing DHS Secretary: Supreme Court DACA ruling 'usurps the clear authority of executive branch' Supreme Court surprises rattle disappointed right Senate confirms McConnell protege to D.C. Circuit MORE.

In a trio of tweets, the president lashed out at the media over the reports, saying that the Times “should be sued” after the news outlet released a correction that noted that friends of the woman involved in the alleged incident with Kavanaugh during law school say she did not recall the incident.

ADVERTISEMENT

“'The New York Times walks back report on Kavanaugh assault claim,'”

Trump tweeted, quoting “Fox & Friends.”

“The one who is actually being assaulted is Justice Kavanaugh — Assaulted by lies and Fake News! This is all about the LameStream Media working with their partner, the Dems.”

“The New York Times walks back report on Kavanaugh assault claim.” @foxandfriends The one who is actually being assaulted is Justice Kavanaugh - Assaulted by lies and Fake News! This is all about the LameStream Media working with their partner, the Dems. — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) September 16, 2019

The Times reported Saturday that a male former classmate of Kavanaugh's claims to have seen the justice expose himself at a party, where friends pushed his genitals against a woman without her consent.

On Monday, the Times said that “the female student declined to be interviewed and friends say that she does not recall the incident.”

In a pair of follow up tweets, Trump again quoted “Fox & Friends,” claiming the “Kavanaugh accuser doesn’t recall incident” while adding that the Times “should be sued.”

“DO YOU BELIEVE WHAT THESE HORRIBLE PEOPLE WILL DO OR SAY,” Trump continued. “They are looking to destroy, and influence his opinions — but played the game badly. They should be sued!”

“What’s happening to Justice Kavanaugh is a disgrace. This guy is not a good man, he is a great man. He has to go to his church with his family while these terrible reports are being written about him, a disgrace!” Dan Bongino @foxandfriends — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) September 16, 2019

Just Out: “Kavanaugh accuser doesn’t recall incident.” @foxandfriends DO YOU BELIEVE WHAT THESE HORRIBLE PEOPLE WILL DO OR SAY. They are looking to destroy, and influence his opinions - but played the game badly. They should be sued! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) September 16, 2019

The latest allegation against Kavanaugh came from nonprofit owner Max Stier and had not previously been made public. It was reported to the FBI during Kavanaugh's Supreme Court confirmation process last year but was not investigated.

Kavanaugh was ultimately confirmed by a 50-48 margin in the Senate after multiple sexual misconduct allegations were made against him.

Kavanaugh has vehemently denied all previous allegations against him, and he declined to answer questions about the new allegations to the Times on Saturday.

Several prominent Democrats, including some 2020 presidential candidates, have called for Kavanaugh's impeachment from the Supreme Court in light of the new allegation.

Trump rushed to Kavanaugh's defense over the weekend, before the correction was issued, tweeting Sunday that “Radical left Democrats” and the "LameStream Media" want to scare Kavanaugh into "turning Liberal."

"Now the Radical Left Democrats and their Partner, the LameStream Media, are after Brett Kavanaugh again, talking loudly of their favorite word, impeachment," he tweeted. "He is an innocent man who has been treated HORRIBLY. Such lies about him."