OPINION

We can transform the tide of rising rancor, deepening division and increasing isolation into a wave of respect, connection and belonging.

Pearce Godwin | Opinion contributor

USA TODAY, Storyful

America is crying out in pain. A pandemic marked by physical distancing sparked hope of social solidarity across differences that have increasingly defined us. Yet now our hearts and streets burn with rage over injustice, callousness and cruelty.

For almost 250 years, America has been an experiment, aspiring — at our best — to be a shining city upon a hill casting beacon lights of freedom, equality and opportunity. Out of our darkest hours, we've seen the "better angels of our nature" maintain bonds of affection.

But there's a wrenching feeling that the American experiment is failing before our eyes.

For it to finally succeed we must boldly and bravely confront the long legacy of racism, bigotry and all means of othering our neighbors. Before bandaging a wound, you must first clean it out. That process is painful but necessary to healing.

Kelly Jordan, Detroit Free Press - USA TODAY Network

Indeed, I pray we'll one day recognize these horrific events as the groanings of rebirth. That through this hurting, we'll find healing. That from this pain will emerge possibility. That together we can create the life, and country, we all want.

We can weave stronger social fabric

Will the American ideal be a story of failure or be finally realized? That is up to us.

Will we retreat into our comfortable, homogeneous tribes and lash out? Or will we step out and bravely step forward into a different future? A future built on fresh, authentic relationships that weave a stronger social fabric in local communities and build bridges across our differences.

If we choose the second path, we can transform the tide of rising rancor, deepening division and increasing isolation into a wave of respect, connection and belonging.

We can inspire hope that Americans of all stripes can come together to solve our shared challenges, that out of many we will finally become one.

Let's embrace our common humanity

Imagine a future in which we first looked at one another with eyes of common humanity, instead of through a dark lens of prejudice and partisanship. That instead of combatants, we saw compatriots.

Imagine a nation in which we looked on our neighbors with love and grace regardless of color, cause or vote. Toward those hurting in our midst, compassion. Toward those fighting for something we don't understand, curiosity. Toward those who don't see things the way we do, humility. Before speaking, listening. Before judging, learning. Before condemnation, conversation.

A most timely Bible verse speaks to the redeeming possibility through this pain. "I am doing a new thing; now it springs forth... I will make a way in the wilderness and rivers in the desert.” Similarly, author David Brooks says, “We are in a valley now. It's an opportunity for a new birth.”

With small acts of bravery, caring and connection, beginning today, let's together create those rivers in the desert and catalyze that new birth for our neighbors and our nation. Indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.

May the great pause of recent weeks and the great pain of recent days give way to a great reset in our land.

Let's go there.

Pearce Godwin is founder and CEO of Listen First Project | National Conversation Project. He is leading the #WeavingCommunity during crisis campaign in partnership with David Brooks' Weave project at the Aspen Institute. #WeavingCommunity is powered by hundreds of organizations in service to neighbors and nation.

View | 214 Photos

Coronavirus editorial cartoon gallery