Karin Kirk

Opinion contributor

Climate change remains one of the most controversial topics in America, with people resolutely divided along partisan battle lines. As fires rage tragically across Australia, flame wars flicker here, too, as we struggle to engage in meaningful discourse about climate change.

But better conversations are not only possible, they’re also relatively easy to bring about. The key is to change the script from the way the dialogue normally takes place:

1. Abandon the talking points. Many exchanges on climate change follow a depressingly familiar playbook. Memes, stale talking points and insults are lobbed at all who dare disagree. This drumbeat of acrimony is all around us: in the news media, among our political leaders and within our own communities. The first step is to avoid that dead end. When you encounter a talking point, resist the urge to fire back. Instead, take a deep breath and try to figure out what lies underneath the rhetoric.

2. Listening is the most underused and powerful communication skill. The quickest way to strengthen your own conversational effectiveness is simple but counterintuitive: Be quiet and be curious. Ask questions, listen to the answers and ask follow-ups. As you dig beyond the talking points, you can establish an entirely different type of conversation. Meanwhile, listening builds trust and sets the stage for deeper engagement.

3. Recognize the places of agreement. Persuading someone to adopt your values and worldview is basically impossible. Instead, look for the places where your values are already aligned. This becomes easy once you pause to listen, because most of us have more in common than we realize. For example, does anyone want more pollution in the world? Is anyone in favor of being left behind in the global transition to a modern energy system? Do we think it’s fair for corporations to pollute for free, while wielding outsize influence over the rules that protect public health? Probably not. Use this common ground to explore how we can work toward mutual goals.

4. The most robust solutions come from a wide constituency. No one has all the answers. We should be vigorously debating climate change, as long as we direct the discussion to ways to confront it. Broad perspectives — from liberals and conservatives, youthful and experienced, bold and cautious — are all needed to hone enduring solutions. Invite ideas and aspirations from those who don’t see the world the way you do, and you’re likely to hash out a richer dialogue than you’d have with like-minded friends.

5. Focus on immediate, common benefits. Not everyone cares about polar bears or coral reefs. Distant problems, no matter how dire, don’t feel as important as the here and now. But you don’t even have to mention climate change while having a conversation about solving it. Instead, talk about reducing pollution, improving public health, maximizing energy efficiency and leveraging American competitiveness. Those are fairly universal values that win easy support.

Talking it out:Learning to discuss complicated issues ahead of the election

We want to hear from you:Be a part of the solution to finding solutions. Tell us here.

Similarly, local actions and solutions can be less polarizing than high-level problems that seem intractable. The shuttering of an aging coal-fired power plant presents a tough transition for a community, but it also invites connecting over common goals. We all want jobs, relevance and a secure future. What paths offer our best shot at getting there?

Climate change is an awful problem that’s hard to confront. But many of the solutions offer widespread benefits, and a note of optimism can make your message more effective.

6. Learn as much as you can, then keep learning. If someone incorrectly claims that volcanoes pump out more carbon dioxide than humans do, you don’t need to get mad. Instead, leverage the misconception as an opening to talk about how the scale of human pollution overwhelms the pace of natural processes. The more you know, the easier it is to keep things productive, and the less likely you’ll get defensive.

Candidates on climate change:Review how the presidential contenders would address the global challenge.

7. The first step toward solving problems is accepting them. A small (but vocal) segment of the population insists that climate change is not an actual problem, or that there is no need to change our century-old ways of generating energy. Those positions are untenable, and people who have dug in their heels have unfortunately guaranteed their own irrelevance. If you want to have your voice heard, bring your ideas and concerns to the table, listen more than you speak, and then you’ll have a much better chance at becoming part of the conversation.

8.Try it! Venturing into a potentially difficult discussion can be intimidating. But if you start by seeking common ground, you can help bust the trend of endless bickering. Lead with your own example, treat others with respect, and you may be pleasantly surprised that it’s not impossible to make progress after all.

Karin Kirk is a geologist who writes for Yale Climate Connections.