Elizabeth Warren is facing the biggest test of her presidential candidacy today as voters in 14 states head to the polls and Bernie Sanders looms large in the Bay State — but the Massachusetts senator says she’s “not worried.”

“Today is just part of getting out and talking to people all across this country,” Warren told reporters after casting her ballot — for herself, of course — in Cambridge this morning. “We’re going to have 40% of our delegates up for grabs today, and that’s a big deal.”

More than a third of the pledged delegates for the Democratic nomination are up for grabs in today’s Super Tuesday sweep, including 91 from Warren’s own Massachusetts. And snapping up as many of those delegates as possible has become a major focus for the Warren campaign after she faltered in the four early states.

Warren said the goal is to “compete everywhere” on Super Tuesday. “We’re in all of the states today and I feel like this has been our chance to get our message out.”

But Warren is not a lock to win her home state, with rival Sanders making significant investments here and drawing thousands to weekend rallies in Boston and Springfield.

“I’m not worried,” Warren said of her rival senator from Vermont. “I am happy to be part of this democratic process.”

She also shrugged off moves by former competitors Minnesota U.S. Sen. Amy Klobuchar; former South Bend, Ind., Mayor Pete Buttigieg; and former Texas U.S. Rep. Beto O’Rourke to endorse former Vice President Joe Biden on Monday as moderates rushed to coalesce around a single candidate to take on Sanders. While Biden stands to benefit from his rivals’ exits, Warren, too, could see a boost from the winnowed field and from her overlapping coalitions with Buttigieg and Klobuchar.

“I think that that’s where their politics were all along. I don’t think there’s anything surprising here,” Warren said, before making her own pitch to voters. “But I do believe the Democratic Party is a progressive party. I believe the democratic ideas are popular not just within our party but across our country. And I think people across this country see big problems and they don’t want somebody to nip around the edges, they want somebody with solutions.”

Throngs of supporters lined the street outside Warren’s home in Cambridge to cheer her on as the Massachusetts senator walked the few blocks between her house and her polling location at the Graham & Parks School, her husband Bruce Mann and beloved golden retriever Bailey in tow. It was the senator’s only scheduled public appearance in Massachusetts on Tuesday before heading to Michigan, which votes next week, for a nighttime rally.

Warren stopped to greet every supporter within arm’s length on Linnaean Street, shaking hands, giving hugs and even making a few pinky promises to youngsters as chants of “Dream big, fight hard!” and “Warren will win!” broke out around her.

“I’m so proud to vote for you,” one woman said as she leaned in for an embrace.

Cambridge Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon was among the supporters that came out to greet Warren.

“The feeling in Cambridge is we’re excited about our hometown senator being on the path to the presidency. We’re supporting her all the way. And I think what you saw was the excitement of so many of us coming together just to make sure she understands the love and support from her hometown,” Mallon said.

Mallon said it was “absolutely” important to put on a show of support after Sanders’ rallies in Boston and Springfield over the weekend. “This is a really hard and grueling thing that she’s doing. And coming home, being in her home and walking to her polling place, I think it was really important for her to see the support.”