President Donald Trump is expressing disdain about Fox News’ latest poll results which suggest Americans prefer the likes of presumptive Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden on coronavirus response and the general election.

On Friday morning, Trump took to Twitter where he criticized the news outlet. He made it clear he is not pleased with the latest poll results.

Trump tweeted, “Why doesn’t [Fox News] put up the CNBC POLL or the (believe it or not!) [CNN] Poll? Hope Roger A is looking down and watching what has happened to this once beautiful creation!”

Why doesn’t @FoxNews put up the CNBC POLL or the (believe it or not!) @CNN Poll? Hope Roger A is looking down and watching what has happened to this once beautiful creation! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) May 22, 2020

Fox News’ latest poll suggests a sharp decline in Trump’s approval rating, indicating Americans believe Biden is more trustworthy on the coronavirus response, China, and healthcare while only trusting the president with the economy.

In addition to the Fox poll, multiple other polls also signal similar indication, as previously reported on IJR.

Joe Biden leads against President Trump by 8% in a new Fox News poll. https://t.co/CDNalUCqNX — MSNBC (@MSNBC) May 22, 2020

Trump’s latest tweet comes less than one day after his previous barrage of verbal attacks criticizing Fox News.

On Thursday, the president shared a series of fiery tweets as he accused the network “doing nothing to help” him get re-elected.

He tweeted, “Many will disagree, but [Fox News] is doing nothing to help Republicans, and me, get re-elected on November 3rd. Sure, there are some truly GREAT people on Fox, but you also have some real ‘garbage’ littered all over the network.”

Many will disagree, but @FoxNews is doing nothing to help Republicans, and me, get re-elected on November 3rd. Sure, there are some truly GREAT people on Fox, but you also have some real “garbage” littered all over the network, people like Dummy Juan Williams, Schumerite Chris… — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) May 21, 2020

….Hahn, Richard Goodstein, Donna Brazile, Niel Cavuto, and many others. They repeat the worst of the Democrat speaking points, and lies. All of the good is totally nullified, and more. Net Result = BAD! CNN & MSDNC are all in for the Do Nothing Democrats! Fox WAS Great! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) May 21, 2020

Despite Trump’s ongoing attacks on the network, Fox News has yet to respond to the president.

Published in