Donald Trump Jr. hit out at former Vice President Joe Biden on Saturday claiming 'enough is enough' following a gaffe in which the Democratic candidate said his late son Beau was the United States Attorney General.

Biden accidentally gave Beau the job promotion on Thursday while speaking at CNN town hall event.

Beau Biden was the Attorney General of Delaware, not of the United States.

Scroll down for video

Another Biden fumble! Joe Biden claims his son was US Attorney General in CNN town hall

Donald Trump Jr. claimed 'it's not right anymore' after Biden's latest gaffe on Thursday

Donald Trump Jr. slammed Biden's gaffe on Twitter claiming that somebody needed to tell him when 'enough is 'enough'

"The Justice Department isn't the President's private lawyer — it's the people's lawyer. ... Let the Justice Department do its job. Period." Former Vice President Joe Biden says President Trump has "weaponized" the DOJ. #CNNTownHall https://t.co/hOfGArFyjf pic.twitter.com/Q2Evgtk59X — CNN (@CNN) February 21, 2020

Donald Trump Jr. slammed Biden's gaffe on Twitter claiming that somebody needed to tell him when 'enough is 'enough' and that 'it's not right anymore'.

'In all fairness Biden has no idea what he's saying or where he is most of the time. When will someone close to him finally say enough is enough? It's not right anymore,' he wrote.

During Thursday's town hall event, Biden was asked a question by a member of the audience on 'How will you restore the barriers between the Department of Justice and the Oval Office?'

Former VP Joe Biden accidentally said his late son Beau was the US Attorney General instead of the Attorney General of Delaware during a CNN town hall on Thursday in yet another gaffe

Former VP Biden, pictured right, with his son Beau, who was Attorney General of Delaware

'Never direct the Justice Department as to who they should or should not indict and under what circumstances they should or should not,' Biden began.

'That is an independent judgment to be made.

'My son, the one who, my deceased son, was the Attorney General of the United States,' he continued, without realizing his mistake, 'and before that, he was a federal prosecutor in one of the largest offices in the country in Philadelphia.

'And I'll tell you what, he wouldn't even talk to me about anything he was doing, his father, and he shouldn't have, and I didn't have any control over either one of those things.'

FOX host Sean Hannity was quick to criticize the former Vice President's mistake on Twitter

Steve Guest, the Republican Party's Rapid Response Director, said Biden needed a 'fact check'

Beau Biden when he was Attorney General of Delaware in 2010. He passed away in 2015

Biden may not have noticed the error but conservative commentators were quick to join Donald Trump Jr. in criticizing the mistake.

'FACT CHECK FOR JOE BIDEN: Your son was not the "Attorney General of the United States",' wrote Steve Guest, the Republican Party's Rapid Response Director.

FOX host Sean Hannity also told Biden he needed to 'fact check'.

Beau Biden served as Attorney General of Delaware from 2006 until 2015. He passed away a few months after he left office from brain cancer aged 46.

Joe Biden faces a key test in the Nevada caucus on Saturday as he hopes that the states more diverse population will prove that he can win black and brown votes and two poor finishes in New Hampshire and Iowa.