Failed Georgia gubernatorial candidate Stacey Abrams explained to Vice why she believes former Vice President Joe Biden never sexually assaulted his former Senate staffer, Tara Reade.

"I think there are two pieces. One, I think believe deserve to be heard. Their allegations deserve to be vetted. They deserve to have investigation and they deserve the space, again, to describe their experiences, but the question I got was not only of Joe Biden's character but of my character," Abrams explained. "And if I believed that he had done what he's accused of doing, I would not be in any other conversations, because that's wrong."

"What he's accused of doing – that he flatly and clearly denied, and I believe his denial – speaks not only to who he is but to who I am," Abrams said.

If she believed that the former vice president sexual assaulted Tara Reade, she would not be endorsing Biden for president.

"I believe that we are obliged to serve justice to those who have been wronged," she said. "And, for me, if I thought this man had done that, I could not be in this space."

From "I believe women" to "I believe Democrat men"



From "We are all Blasey Ford" to "We are all Joe Biden"



"It speaks not only to who he is, but who I am," Abrams says, defending Biden pic.twitter.com/Emrj07L3C4 — Elizabeth Harrington (@LizRNC) May 12, 2020

What's interesting is this completely contradicts what Abrams had to say about Christine Blasey Ford, who accused Justice Brett Kavanaugh of sexual assault.

Stacey Abrams said she believed Blasey Ford



"If there is even a hint of impropriety—let alone the credible allegations—we should pause" pic.twitter.com/y6l6FdAAZU — Elizabeth Harrington (@LizRNC) May 12, 2020

Not a single person corroborated Blasey Ford's allegations. Multiple people have corroborated Reade's allegations against the presumptive Democratic nominee. There's a clip from “Larry King Live” in 1993 shows Reade’s mother calling into the show to ask for advice on her daughter's behalf.

Reade told her brother, Collin Moulton, and her then-neighbor Lynda LaCasse. After working in Washington, D.C., Reade moved to California where she worked for State Sen. Jack O'Connell. During her time there, she worked with Lorraine Sanchez, a legislative staffer. Sanchez recalled similar conversations about the Biden allegations and Reade's ultimate dismissal for making the allegation.

Both LaCasse and Sanchez are Democrats and they've spoken out so they can't be accused of doing this for political motives.

How many more people need to come forward before Democrats are back to "believing women?"

Editor's Note: Want to support Townhall so we can keep telling the truth about Joe Biden? Join Townhall VIP and use the promo code CREEPYJOE to get 25% off VIP membership!