In the Human Rights Campaign's latest foray into insanity, the supposed defender of LGBTQ rights is endorsing impeachment of President Trump. Apparently, the group with a vendetta against Vice President Mike Pence would like to make him president.

On Friday, the group put out an official press release announcing its support for an impeachment inquiry into Trump, over the Ukraine-Biden controversy, which has absolutely nothing to do with gay rights. Human Rights Campaign President Alphonso David said, “The safety and well-being of our democracy is at stake,” and threw the group’s full weight behind impeachment.

These allegations are serious. @HRC supports a formal impeachment inquiry of Donald Trump. As @SpeakerPelosi said, no one is above the law, and that includes the President of the United States. https://t.co/ZdOQsd6oEC — Alphonso David (@AlphonsoDavid) September 27, 2019

Maybe I’m old-fashioned, but I preferred it when gay rights groups focused on, you know, gay rights.

Of course, the Human Rights Campaign and other left-wing “gay rights groups” long ago turned into front groups for the Democratic Party, and this latest display of naked partisanship is just another reminder.

After all, this is the same group that releases annual “LGBTQ rights” scorecards for lawmakers but docks Republicans as “anti-LGBTQ” for their stances on unrelated issues such as immigration, healthcare, and abortion. So while it’s certainly disturbing to see the Human Rights Campaign weighing in on an obviously political issue like impeachment, which is clearly unrelated to gay rights, it’s not exactly surprising. Partisan activism has been their modus operandi for some time now.

Whether you agree or disagree with their stance on Trump’s impeachment is beside the point. Their stance isn’t that radical, at least, it’s standard among Democrats, and even some anti-Trump Republicans. I personally oppose impeachment, largely because the disturbing nature of Trump’s conduct aside, it would tear the country apart when done over alleged crimes that are dubious at best.

This is certainly a debatable stance, but it has absolutely nothing to do with gay rights. In fact, gay people can easily take either side of the issue. Are we self-hating homophobes if disagree with the Human Rights Campaign and oppose impeachment? Hardly.

Plus, there’s something deeply ironic about the Human Rights Campaign calling for an impeachment that would, in all likelihood, leave us with President Pence. They do say in their official statement that the investigation should include “an investigation of any other persons, up to and including Vice President Mike Pence” who may have been involved, but let’s be honest: There’s not even a remote chance that Pence is caught up in this shadiness. Say what you want about the man, but he’s always kept his nose squeaky-clean. So far, he is implicated in absolutely none of this Ukraine shadiness.

So when the Human Rights Campaign is calling for Trump’s impeachment, they are, in essence, calling for the inauguration of a President Pence. For those of us in touch with reality, the prospect of a Pence presidency isn’t some anti-gay nightmare . But, of course, the Human Rights Campaign has spent years fearmongering and smearing Pence as a viciously anti-gay bigot. It’s bizarre to see them now call for his elevation to the Oval Office.

Then again, logical thinking has never exactly been the Human Rights Campaign's strong suit.