A tiny Montana company from Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke’s hometown inked a $300 million contract to help restore electrical power on Puerto Rico, according to a report Tuesday.

Whitefish Energy, which only had two employees when Hurricane Maria slammed into Puerto Rico on Sept. 20, now has 280 workers on the island, the majority of whom are subcontractors, the Washington Post reported.

The contract with the Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority is the largest issued so far in the relief effort, the report said.

PREPA decided to hire Whitefish instead of activating “mutual aid” arrangements it has with other utilities, understandings typically used among US power companies to hasten recovery efforts from natural disasters, such as the recent hurricanes in Texas and Florida.

A month after Maria hit, about three-quarters of Puerto Rico’s 3.4 million residents still are without power.

A former official at the Energy Department said the selection of Whitefish is “odd.”

“The fact that there are so many utilities with experience in this and a huge track record of helping each other out, it is at least odd why [the utility] would go to Whitefish,” Susan F. Tierney, a former senior official at the Energy Department and state regulatory agencies, told the newspaper. “I’m scratching my head wondering how it all adds up.”

Ricardo Ramos, PREPA’s executive director, has told reporters that Whitefish was chosen because it was the first company “available to arrive and they were the ones that first accepted the terms and conditions” of the authority.

“The doubts that have been raised about Whitefish, from my point of view, are completely unfounded,” he said.

Whitefish spokesman Chris Chiames dismissed the criticisms as “carping.”

“So the carping by others is unfounded, and we stand by our work and our commitment to the people of Puerto Rico,” he told the Washington Post.

Zinke’s office said the secretary knows Whitefish’s top executive, but that’s not unusual in a town with a population of a little more than 7,000 people.

Remains of a shed scattered over a basketball court after Hurricane Maria near Loiza, Puerto Rico Reuters Buildings damaged by Hurricane Maria in Lares, Puerto Rico Reuters A damaged home among blown-down trees in San Sebastian, Puerto Rico Reuters The contents of a damaged home are visible as recovery efforts continue following Hurricane Maria near the town of Comerio, Puerto Rico. REUTERS The remains of damaged homes stand next to a cemetery in Morovis, Puerto Rico. REUTERS A truck attempts to pull another vehicle across a flood-damaged roadway near the village of San Lorenzo, Puerto Rico. REUTERS The contents of a damaged home near the town of Comerio, Puerto Rico REUTERS Residents fill containers with water from a creek near the town of Comerio, Puerto Rico. REUTERS A landslide-damaged home near Orocovis, Puerto Rico Reuters Reuters Damaged homes near Ciales, Puerto Rico Reuters A damaged home on the edge of a swollen river near Ciales, Puerto Rico Reuters A bridge shows the effects of a swollen river. REUTERS The remains of a highway bridge near Ciales, Puerto Rico REUTERS REUTERS A flood-damaged bridge near Ciales, Puerto Rico REUTERS Aluminum roofing twisted and thrown off buildings near San Jose, Puerto Rico REUTERS Traffic is diverted to avoid a flood-damaged bridge near San Jose, Puerto Rico. Reuters People inspect the remains of a flood-damaged bridge near the village of San Lorenzo, Puerto Rico. Reuters The contents of a damaged home near the town of Comerio, Puerto Rico Reuters Ad Up Next Close Cops searching for woman in subway slashing This is the woman who police say slashed a stranger... 20 View Slideshow Back Continue Share this: Facebook

Twitter

Flipboard

WhatsApp

Email

Copy

Advertisement

“Everybody knows everybody,” Zinke’s office said in an email.

It added that Zinke played no role in getting the contract.

The House Committee on Natural Resources is looking into PREPA’s hiring of Whitefish.