Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin met face to face for the first time this week at the G20. One issue they said they discussed is whether Russia meddled in the U.S. elections. What remains unclear is what President Trump believes about Russia’s alleged cyber hacking. Before the two met in person, he said this in Poland on Thursday: Trump: I think it was Russia, but I think it was probably other people and or countries, and I see nothing wrong with that statement. Nobody really knows, nobody really knows for sure. That assessment goes against what the CIA, the FBI, the NSA and the DNI all say, which is that Russian hackers interfered with U.S. elections. The confusion continued after the two leaders met on Friday. Putin: “He asked a lot of questions about this issue, I answered these questions as well as I could. It seems to me he accepted it and agreed, but you are better off asking him what he thought about it.” President Trump himself seemed to be avoiding making a clear statement. (let’s read this aloud) Trump Tweet: I strongly pressed President Putin twice about Russian meddling in our election. He vehemently denied it. I’ve already given my opinion. He then proposed protecting the U.S. from cyber attacks by collaborating with Russia… Putin & I discussed forming an impenetrable Cyber Security unit so that election hacking, & many other negative things, will be guarded.. Politicians from President Trump’s own party were quick to pounce. Graham: “It’s not the dumbest idea I’ve ever heard, but it’s pretty close.” McCain: I’m sure that Putin could be of enormous assistance since he’s doing the hacking. Senator Marco Rubio of Florida said Partnering with Russia on Cyber Security is akin to partnering with Assad on a Chemical Weapons Unit. The White House chief of staff on Sunday tried to clear the debate up, saying what President Trump himself has not. Priebus: “The president absolutely did not believe the denial of President Putin.” In any case, the one having the last laugh appears to be President Putin.