George Soros | Getty Soros-backed group begins work in Florida's I-4 corridor

TALLAHASSEE — A George Soros-funded group has given $500,000 to a Florida political committee aimed at turning out progressive voters in Florida’s nationally watched I-4 corridor.

The money was donated in March by Democracy PAC to United for Progress, a committee that in the past has been used by Soros, a major donor to Democrats.

Advertisement

Florida’s I-4 corridor, which encompasses a dozen counties, is a politically important region that is key to winning Florida, the nation’s largest swing state. It is packed with people who have no major party affiliation — more than 1.5 million headed into the 2016 presidential cycle — making it a target for campaigns and causes eager to tap into the huge reservoir of persuadable voters.

“Our mission is focused on Central Florida,” said United for Progress Chairman Juan Marcos Vilar. “We plan to do voter outreach in the I-4 Corridor, and possibly support candidates who are working to support our issues in education, affordable housing, school safety, living wages, health and protecting the environment.”

One area of focus is Puerto Rico, which lost thousands of residents to Central Florida after the island was devastated by Hurricane Maria in 2017. More than 1.2 million Puerto Ricans call Florida home, giving them increasing political sway. A majority live in the Central Florida counties of Orange, Seminole and Osceola.

“We also want the candidate we support to be champions for Puerto Rico and for Latinos issues in general,” Vilar said.

The committee supports a “Marshall-style program” to help Puerto Rico rebound from Hurricane Maria, immigration reform that “respects our tradition as a nation of immigrants" and democracy in Venezuela and Cuba, Vilar said.

Soros, a nationally known Democratic donor and GOP boogeyman, is not new to Florida politics. In 2016, he helped fund the campaigns of local state attorneys who supported his criminal reform justice platform.

United for Progress also backed Puerto Rican Democrat Robert Asencio, who beat Rep. David Rivera, a Republican congressman, in a hotly contested 2016 South Florida race.

The committee blanketed Rivera's Miami district with mailers calling him one of the "most corrupt" members of Congress.

United for Progress came onto Florida’s political scene in 2016. Since then, it has raised $1.5 million, about $950,000 of which came directly from Soros, and the rest from organizations he funds or helped found.

Democracy PAC's $500,000 donation in March was the committee's first contribution since October. Most of its spending so far this cycle has been on polling.