Subscribers to The New Yorker’s new 2020 election newsletter, On the Trail, received this piece in their in-boxes. Sign up to receive future installments.

Early Tuesday morning, Ohio became the fourth state—after Louisiana, Georgia, and Kentucky—to postpone a primary election because of COVID-19. The decision, which came just hours before polls were scheduled to open, was made by Governor Mike DeWine, who argued that voting would put older Americans, especially poll workers, at risk of contracting the virus. In response, John Cranley, the mayor of Cincinnati, issued a public statement. “I believe the Governor made this decision because he believes it is right for public health,” he wrote. “However, I worry that the precedent could haunt future elections by people who are not motivated by the same public good.” In Ohio, voters already have the right to request an absentee ballot, and send it in through the mail. Because it seems unlikely that a new in-person election could be held anytime soon, Cranley continued, “I am calling on the State to mail absentee ballots to all registered voters and encourage mail-in voting.”

Primary and local election dates are, to an extent, fungible. When Hurricane Andrew ravaged parts of Florida, in 1992, and Hurricane Katrina decimated the Gulf Coast, thirteen years later, officials changed the dates of pending elections. September 11, 2001, was a municipal primary day in New York. After the planes hit, voting was halted and rescheduled for two weeks later. More recently, the 2018 New York primary was moved to avoid conflicting with both 9/11 and Rosh Hashanah. General elections are different. Their dates are set by federal law, so changing them would require an act of Congress and the blessing of the President. Even then, a date change would, most likely, have to withstand a challenge in the courts.

Lately, I’ve been hearing people point out that a Presidential election was held in the midst of the Civil War, which illustrates either the commitment of American voters or the unyielding calendar of our democracy. A pandemic, with its invisible enemy, presents a more miasmic challenge to voting, though. Microbes are indiscriminate: anyone and everyone is susceptible. But, while it is true that public polling places present a threat to public health, it is equally true that not voting is a threat to the health of the Republic. Could Donald Trump, who in the past has “joked” about staying in office past his term, use COVID-19 to subvert the electoral process? A recent piece in Slate lays out a frightening scenario where Trump could, in essence, hijack the Electoral College. Richard L. Hasen, a law professor at the University of California, Irvine, and the author of “Election Meltdown,” told me that, in such a scenario, “there would be rioting in the streets.”

The next general election is on November 3rd. Insuring free, fair, and safe elections will require providing everyone the ability to vote without having to step into the public sphere. Hasen’s solution is to give voters the option—though not the obligation—to vote by mail. This is also the goal of new legislation proposed by Senators Ron Wyden, of Oregon, and Amy Klobuchar, of Minnesota. Wyden told me, “Every jurisdiction already allows absentee voting for members of the military or people who can’t make it to the polls, so we’re not starting from scratch.” Five states have universal vote-by-mail, and thirty allow voters to request an absentee ballot without having to provide an excuse. Even so, scaling up in time for the November election—Wyden believes we have no more than six months to get there—will present challenges. An earlier bill introduced by Wyden, the Resilient Elections During Quarantines and Natural Disasters Act of 2020, proposes five hundred million dollars in grants to help all fifty states institute mail-in voting. The Brennan Center for Justice, at New York University, estimates the real cost would range from $951 million to $1.4 billion. (The Klobuchar-Wyden bill does not suggest a specific allocation, but Klobuchar told me that Congress should make sure that this transition does not burden the states.)

There are more than nine thousand voting districts in the country, with varying rules and regulations. Some will require an act of the state legislature to allow no-excuse absentee voting. Some will require a constitutional amendment. And then there are the logistics. It is highly unusual to introduce a new way of voting during a general election; election officials will need time and training to adapt, and they may not have either. In Wyden’s home state of Oregon, which allows universal vote-by-mail, every voter is sent a ballot and a prepaid return envelope with a tracking bar code inside. This preserves anonymity and enables voters to check that their marked ballot was received. One of the provisions of Wyden’s bill, however, would allow voters to receive their ballots electronically and print them at home. That’s convenient and expedient, but it raises security concerns. “Anytime you have people voting outside a polling place,” Hasen said, “there is going to be the possibility of coercion, vote tampering, and ballots that get tossed out.”

There are other concerns, as well. In some cases, clerks have disproportionately challenged the authenticity of signatures on mail-in ballots cast by people of color and younger voters. A 2018 report by the A.C.L.U. of Florida, for example, found that “Younger and racial and ethnic minority voters casting VBM ballots were at least twice as likely as older and white voters to have their VBM ballot rejected in the presidential elections of 2012 and 2016.” (King County, Washington, which has had universal mail-in voting since 2005, tries to preëmpt this kind of disenfranchisement by sending a ballot-rejection-challenge form and prepaid envelope within a day to voters whose ballots were not accepted.) And voting by mail is a less than optimal solution for voters without a fixed address or those who live on tribal lands.

“We know it’s not going to be perfect,” Klobuchar told me. “But we need to push as many people as we can to vote early as well as to vote by mail.” On Wednesday, she and Wyden introduced the National Disaster and Emergency Ballot Act of 2020, a hybrid of proposals from both senators to preserve and protect the franchise. Klobuchar, who has been talking with Roy Blunt, her Republican colleague from Missouri, to garner bipartisan support, is especially keen to see states introduce a twenty-day early-voting period, which would allow people who need (or prefer) to vote in person to do so without having to encounter crowds. This would also lessen the exposure of poll workers, the majority of whom are over sixty, which puts them at high risk if they were to contract COVID-19. (The Klobuchar-Wyden bill also proposes training high-school and college students as poll workers.)

It is not lost on either senator that efforts to pass election-security legislation have been stymied by the Senate Majority Leader, Mitch McConnell, for the past three years, and that Republicans around the country have pursued policies to limit the franchise and suppress the vote. It is also not lost on their Republican colleagues that states which have universal vote-by-mail have seen an increase in voter participation. But that does not necessarily favor Democrats. Hasen pointed out that Republican voters, who skew older, may prefer voting at home. He also said that, until recently, Republicans were more likely to vote that way than Democrats. One Democratic operative I spoke with worried that if much of the country were to vote by mail in November the Republicans would have the advantage, because “they actually return the ballots.” Wyden reminded me that Utah, a state that is “as red as it gets,” votes by mail. In other words, giving voters the option to vote by mail, over a longer election period, is not a stealth way to enlarge the franchise—it’s a way to preserve it. “We’re in an unprecedented emergency,” Hasen said. “Let’s solve November, and we can worry about other things later.”

A Guide to the Coronavirus