From the Left

The left is critical of the Trump administration’s response to the crisis to date.

“Trump has served up an irresponsible and dangerous buffet of misinformation about the threat posed by the coronavirus… Trump assured Americans at that February 26 news conference that the number of people infected in the United States is ‘going very substantially down, not up.’… [but] The CDC had made it clear to expect more, not fewer cases, an estimation that has proven accurate… Trump was also rightly criticized earlier this week when he tried to undermine the World Health Organization's recent announcement that the mortality rate for the coronavirus was no longer just over 2%, but had risen based on new data to 3.4%. In a phone call on Fox News's ‘Hannity’ show, Trump bluntly stated that ‘the 3.4% is really a false number.’ What was the basis for Trump disputing the health care experts at WHO? Trump commented, ‘this is just my hunch.’"

Dean Obeidallah, CNN

“As the coronavirus threat was just starting to come into focus in early February, the White House recommended significant cuts to investments at the Centers of Disease Control and Prevention. To be sure, this president had called for deep cuts to the CDC budget before, and Congress ignored those requests. But calling for CDC cuts in the midst of a global viral outbreak seemed especially bizarre. Stranger still, the White House apparently hasn't changed its mind.”

Steve Benen, MaddowBlog

“The unforgivable shortage of tests—and the hoops doctors have to jump through before they can get patients tested—has created a situation where no one knows how many people are actually infected. Medical professionals have complained in frustration that CDC guidance is almost useless… "We now know that health officials at the CDC wanted to recommend that elderly and physically fragile Americans avoid flying on commercial airlines. The White House ordered that the air travel recommendation be removed, endangering the very people the virus is likely to affect most severely. CDC officials couldn’t explain why they refused to use the World Health Organization’s coronavirus test and instead tried to develop one that failed… It is bad for Americans when the vice president and the HHS secretary, both charged with communicating the government’s plans to the public, can’t even agree with each other.”

Lili Loofbourow, Slate



“Agencies like the C.D.C. offer rudimentary advice on what symptoms to watch for and how to wash hands effectively, and say not to touch one’s face. But most guidance stops there and fails to give unambiguous advice on when and how to limit gatherings, cancel big events, postpone travel and how, precisely, people should prepare for potential quarantines or hunkering down.… there’s not just an absence of information but also an absence of authority.”

Charlie Warzel, New York Times

Regarding the travel ban and Trump’s speech on Wednesday, critics point out that “The ban will exclude the United Kingdom, despite the fact the country has more than 450 cases of coronavirus, far more than many of the European nations that will be barred under the ban. (The president has also not banned travel from South Korea, which has so far had a much higher rate of coronavirus cases than any European country outside of Italy.)…



“While the president focused on efforts to keep more people from bringing the coronavirus to the U.S. from abroad, he largely ignored any discussion of efforts to contain the Covid-19 cases that are already rapidly spreading throughout the country. Trump pushed common-sense measures that individuals and groups can take, like social distancing and practicing good hygiene. But he declined to mention any efforts that would address key issues facing the U.S. as the virus spreads, like increasing coronavirus testing or taking action to combat the looming possibility that there may be more Americans who require hospitalization than hospitals can actually handle.”

Alison Durkee, Vanity Fair

“We’re already seeing ‘community spreading’ of the virus — that is, people with no international travel and no links to known cases are now getting the virus… [The ban] was an extraordinary move, but one that may do little to stop or mitigate the spread of coronavirus— while potentially damaging the US’s already somewhat strained relationship with its European allies.”

Jen Kirby, Vox