The Trump administration on Tuesday declassified an email that former national security adviser (NSA) Susan Rice sent herself about a meeting discussing "sensitive information related to Russia" and her incoming successor, Michael Flynn.

The email, which Rice sent the day of President Trump Donald John TrumpProtesters tear down, burn statue of Confederate general in DC US attorney in NYC who spearheaded probes of Trump allies refuses to leave as DOJ pushes ouster Trump to host 4th of July event despite pleas from lawmakers to cancel MORE's inauguration, describes a Jan. 5, 2017, Oval Office meeting between herself, former President Obama, former Vice President Joe Biden Joe BidenSusan Rice calls Trump administration 'racist to its core,' says Senate backers belong in 'trash heap of history' Trump mocks Biden event that practiced social distancing Trump to visit Arizona, Wisconsin next week MORE, former FBI Director James Comey James Brien ComeyBolton book shows nastiness rules at Trump White House Showtime miniseries to feature Jeff Daniels as Comey, Brendan Gleeson as Trump GOP votes to give Graham broad subpoena power in Obama-era probe MORE and former Deputy Attorney General Sally Yates Sally Caroline YatesShowtime miniseries to feature Jeff Daniels as Comey, Brendan Gleeson as Trump Top FBI lawyer resigns Senate Republicans issue first subpoena in Biden-Burisma probe MORE.

"Comey said he does have some concerns that incoming NSA Flynn is speaking frequently with Russian Ambassador [Sergey] Kislyak. Comey said that could be an issue as it relates to sharing sensitive information," Rice wrote in the email, which was formerly classified as "top secret."

ADVERTISEMENT

"President Obama asked if Comey was saying that the NSC [National Security Council] should not pass sensitive information related to Russia to Flynn. Comey replied 'potentially,'" she continued. "He added that he has no indication thus far that Flynn has passed classified information to Kislyak, but he noted that 'the level of communication is unusual.'"

Sen. Ron Johnson Ronald (Ron) Harold JohnsonThe Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - GOP, Dems jockey for position on police reform Sunday show preview: Congress debates police reform legislation after George Floyd killing Senate Democrat introduces legislation to protect US against crippling cyberattack MORE (R-Wis.), who obtained the email through the Justice Department, emphasized the "significance of the meeting" described in the email to the probe by GOP lawmakers into the handling of the investigation into Russia's election interference.

Flynn, who pleaded guilty in 2017 to lying to FBI agents as a consequence of former special counsel Robert Mueller Robert (Bob) MuellerCNN's Toobin warns McCabe is in 'perilous condition' with emboldened Trump CNN anchor rips Trump over Stone while evoking Clinton-Lynch tarmac meeting The Hill's 12:30 Report: New Hampshire fallout MORE's investigation into Russia's election interference, has been a key player in the GOP's probe. The Justice Department has since made the controversial recommendation to drop the case against Flynn.

Read the declassified email below.