On Monday, “The World Health Organization [kicked] off its first ever virtual assembly, but fears abound that US-China tensions could derail the strong action needed to address the COVID-19 crisis.” AFP



“China supports a comprehensive review of the global response to the COVID-19 pandemic led by the World Health Organization (WHO) after the virus that causes the disease is brought under control, Chinese President Xi Jinping said on Monday.” Reuters



Both sides urge the US to take a stronger stance regarding Taiwan:



“When the coronavirus emerged from Wuhan, Taiwan moved quickly to head it off. Authorities seized on past experience from the 2003 SARS outbreak and leveraged the island’s strong technology sector to bring the virus under control without the draconian measures used in mainland China. With a population of 23 million—more than New York State—and only 110 miles from China, Taiwan has recorded 440 confirmed cases of COVID-19 and just seven deaths. The island has gone more than 30 days without a new locally transmitted infection…



“As China looks to grow its power by offering health and financial assistance to countries hit hard by the coronavirus, the outbreak has presented an opportunity for Taiwan to solidify itself as the antithesis of Beijing: a democratic and reliable international partner that, after controlling the virus at home, can assist governments as far afield, and as powerful, as America’s—despite Taipei’s exclusion from much of the international community’s formal workings. It has sought to demonstrate that moves to isolate the self-governing island are counterproductive. Indeed, the pandemic is shaping up to be a moment of global recognition for Taiwan.”

Timothy McLaughlin, The Atlantic



Sen. Tom Cotton (R-AR) writes, “It's up to the United States to stand up for Taiwan to ensure its contributions are acknowledged and its democratic aspirations are respected. The United States should continue to push for Taiwan's meaningful participation in international organizations like the WHO and United Nations. If observer status isn't granted, we could even invite Taiwanese officials as guests, as the Trump administration did last year at a religious freedom event hosted at the United Nations…



“Taiwan must also be supported militarily, recognizing that its freedom is vital to maintaining an open and prosperous Asia-Pacific region. We can advance this goal by including Taiwan in military exercises in the region like RIMPAC and continuing sales of asymmetric, survivable arms to Taiwan so it is equipped to defend itself. Finally, we can cultivate deeper commercial ties with Taiwan, which is already our tenth-largest trading partner in goods.”

Tom Cotton, Newsweek



Other opinions below.