Sen. Rand Paul Randal (Rand) Howard PaulWhite House throws support behind GOP police reform bill Rep. Andy Barr's wife dies suddenly at 39 Senate GOP unveils police reform proposal MORE (R-Ky.) on Thursday will try to force Supreme Court Chief Justice John Roberts to read out loud a question regarding the anonymous whistleblower at the center of the impeachment inquiry.

Paul’s strategy, outlined on Twitter by his spokesman, will escalate a standoff between the two men on the Senate floor after much behind-the-scenes haggling.

“Senator Paul will insist on his question being asked during today’s trial. Uncertain of what will occur on the Senate floor, but American people deserve to know how this all came about,” Sergio Gor, a spokesman for Paul, tweeted.

ADVERTISEMENT

Paul’s office indicated in a subsequent release that they were unsure whether the effort would be successful, but said “Paul believes it is crucial the American people get the full story on what started the Democrats’ push to impeach President Donald Trump.”

A source confirmed Wednesday that Roberts has indicated he would not read a question from Paul regarding the whistleblower.

The question from Paul is expected to name the individual. Because Roberts is responsible for reading the questions aloud, that would put him in the position of publicly outing the person on the floor of the Senate.

The whistleblower has been a focus of GOP criticism for months, with President Trump Donald John TrumpProtesters tear down, burn statue of Confederate general in DC US attorney in NYC who spearheaded probes of Trump allies refuses to leave as DOJ pushes ouster Trump to host 4th of July event despite pleas from lawmakers to cancel MORE last year saying the individual was "close to a spy."

Conservatives used a series of questions on Wednesday to try to shed new information on the whistleblower.

ADVERTISEMENT

GOP Sens. Mike Lee Michael (Mike) Shumway LeeOvernight Energy: Senate passes major lands conservation bill | Mnuchin ordered to give Native American tribes full stimulus funding | Key Republican jeopardizes Trump consumer safety nominee Senate passes major lands conservation bill Facial recognition tools under fresh scrutiny amid police protests MORE (Utah), Ted Cruz Rafael (Ted) Edward CruzTrade groups make lobbying push to be included in small business loan program Republicans take aim at Google in fight to remove legal shield Roberts sparks backlash from conservative senators with DACA ruling MORE (Texas) and Josh Hawley Joshua (Josh) David HawleyHillicon Valley: Trump tweet gets warning again | Australia under cyberattack | North Face pulls Facebook ads Republicans take aim at Google in fight to remove legal shield Supreme Court surprises rattle disappointed right MORE (Mo.) asked for details on who the whistleblower might have worked with.

Roughly 50 minutes later, Cruz, Hawley and Sen. Jerry Moran Gerald (Jerry) MoranCoronavirus Report: The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Mayor Quinton Lucas Memorial Day during COVID-19: How to aid our country's veterans Pass the Primary Care Enhancement Act MORE (R-Kan.) asked the House managers if the whistleblower worked for or with former Vice President Joe Biden Joe BidenSusan Rice calls Trump administration 'racist to its core,' says Senate backers belong in 'trash heap of history' Trump mocks Biden event that practiced social distancing Trump to visit Arizona, Wisconsin next week MORE.

None of those questions revealed the individual's identity.

Some GOP senators indicated they were not supportive of questions that would name the whistleblower.

Sen. John Thune John Randolph ThuneRepublican rift opens up over qualified immunity for police Republicans face long odds of changing provision on Confederate-named bases Overnight Defense: Trump plan to pull troops from Germany gets bipartisan pushback | Top GOP senator says it's time to look at changing Confederate-named bases | GOP divided over renaming Army bases MORE (S.D.), the No. 2 Republican senator, suggested that GOP leadership had not been involved in rejecting questions, but that he did not expect the whistleblower to be named on the floor during the impeachment trial.

ADVERTISEMENT

"I don't think that happens, and I guess I would hope that it doesn't," he told reporters Wednesday.

Sen. Lindsey Graham Lindsey Olin GrahamTop DHS official: Trump instructed agency to 'restart the DACA process' Republican rift opens up over qualified immunity for police Trump calls for 'new justices' on Supreme Court after unfavorable rulings MORE (R-S.C.) told reporters on Thursday that he didn’t think the impeachment trial was the setting for Paul’s whistleblower fight.

“Not in this environment,” he said, asked if he thought the question was a good idea.