Sen. Doug Jones (D-Ala.), viewed as the most vulnerable Senate Democrat running in November, said on Wednesday that he will vote to convict President Trump Donald John TrumpProtesters tear down, burn statue of Confederate general in DC US attorney in NYC who spearheaded probes of Trump allies refuses to leave as DOJ pushes ouster Trump to host 4th of July event despite pleas from lawmakers to cancel MORE on both articles of impeachment.



"After many sleepless nights, I have reluctantly concluded that the evidence is sufficient to convict the President for both abuse of power and obstruction of Congress," he said in a statement.



Jones's announcement comes hours before the Senate's votes on the two House-passed articles of impeachment: abuse of power over the delayed Ukraine aid and obstructing Congress's investigations into those actions.

Jones has insisted for weeks that he is undecided on how he would vote, telling reporters on Monday that he was "getting there" but still wanted to review notes and talk to colleagues. He sparked speculation last month that he could split his votes — convicting on one and acquitting on the other — when he told USA Today that he has "concerns" about the House manager's second article of impeachment, which deals with alleged obstruction of Congress. Jones acknowledged on Wednesday that the second article "gave me even more pause," adding that he "struggled to understand" the House's strategy. "However, after careful consideration of the evidence developed in the hearings, the public disclosures, the legal precedents, and the trial, I believe the President deliberately and unconstitutionally obstructed Congress by refusing to cooperate with the investigation in any way," Jones said. Jones added that Trump's actions "demonstrate a belief that he is above the law" and if left unchecked would risk guaranteeing that no future whistleblower or witness will ever come forward and no future President ... will be subject to Congressional oversight." Jones added that Trump's actions "demonstrate a belief that he is above the law" and if left unchecked would risk guaranteeing that no future whistleblower or witness will ever come forward and no future President ... will be subject to Congressional oversight."

On the first article, abuse of power, Jones said he was "deeply troubled" by the arguments from Trump's legal team.

"The President’s actions placed his personal interests well above the national interests and threatened the security of the United States, our allies in Europe, and our ally Ukraine. His actions were more than simply inappropriate. They were an abuse of power," Jones said.