President Trump Donald John TrumpProtesters tear down, burn statue of Confederate general in DC US attorney in NYC who spearheaded probes of Trump allies refuses to leave as DOJ pushes ouster Trump to host 4th of July event despite pleas from lawmakers to cancel MORE on Wednesday tweeted a video showing him running for president indefinitely minutes after the Senate voted to acquit him on allegations he abused his power and obstructed Congress.

The video, which Trump has shared before, plays on a Time magazine cover from October 2018 that showed campaign signs showing Trump running for office every four years from 2024 until 2044. The cover story that month was titled “How Trumpism Outlasts Trump.”

ADVERTISEMENT

Trump did not mention impeachment at all in the tweet, but it marked his first public statement since the GOP-controlled Senate voted to acquit him Wednesday afternoon. Trump later said that he would make a public statement about impeachment at 12 p.m. on Thursday at the White House to “to discuss our Country’s VICTORY on the Impeachment Hoax!”

Trump often jokes at his campaign rallies that he could serve more than two terms as president. U.S. presidents are limited to serving two terms in the White House.

The edited clip that Trump shared on Wednesday afternoon is set to the tune of "Peer Gynt Suite No. 1." It zooms in on an additional campaign yard sign reading “Trump 2048” that Trump is standing behind. The sign ticks up by several hundred years and eventually transforms to read “Trump 4EVA.”

A number of Trump’s advisers and campaign aides have weighed in on the impeachment verdict on Twitter and in written statements, but Thursday will offer the president’s first extensive remarks on the subject of the acquittal vote.

Trump has regularly derided the impeachment as a partisan “witch hunt” aimed at damaging him politically ahead of 2020. His past remarks suggest he is likely to use the remarks to take a victory lap following his acquittal and criticize House Democrats for voting to impeach him in December.