Until Wednesday afternoon, the divide in American politics seemed to be set in high-performance concrete reinforced by tungsten steel rods. That changed when Sen. Mitt Romney Willard (Mitt) Mitt Romney'The Senate could certainly use a pastor': Georgia Democrat seeks to seize 'moral moment' Republicans brush off Bolton's bombshells Bipartisan Senate group offers bill to strengthen watchdog law after Trump firings MORE (R-Utah) became the first senator in American history to vote to convict a president of his own party.

The word commonly used to describe the virulent partisanship in our politics is “tribal.” But that unfairly disparages indigenous tribes around the world. The divisions have torn apart families and friends. In 2018, when Rep. Paul Gosar Paul Anthony GosarConservative lawmakers press Trump to suspend guest worker programs for a year Impeachment figure among those chosen for Facebook's new oversight board Cruz rebukes San Antonio City Council for denouncing 'Chinese virus' as hate speech MORE (R-Ariz.) campaigned for reelection, six brothers and sisters attacked him in a Democratic commercial as a racist. After winning reelection, Gosar said that Stalin would have been proud of his siblings.

Trump, that impresario of divisiveness, rancor and vilification, bears the brunt of the blame. But the Democrats need to look in the mirror, too. I fully understand why House Speaker Nancy Pelosi Nancy PelosiHouse Republicans call for cutting office budgets of lawmakers who use proxy voting The Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Trump under fire as SCOTUS, Bolton deal blows Republican rift opens up over qualified immunity for police MORE (D-Calif.) tore up Trump’s State of the Union speech after he refused to shake her hand. But clips of the two unedifying scenes went viral and probably even alarmed some children.

ADVERTISEMENT

Sen. Bernie Sanders Bernie SandersOvernight Defense: Navy won't reinstate fired captain | Dems probe use of federal officers in DC | Air Force appoints woman as top noncommissioned officer Jamaal Bowman raises M, launches 0,000 ad buy ahead of New York primary Dems request watchdog probe use of federal law enforcement in DC during Floyd protests MORE (D-Vt.) isn’t helping much either when, with us-against-them rhetoric, he demonizes corporations; entire industries like health care, where hundreds of thousands of Americans work; and billionaires, whom he compares to “drug addicts.”

That’s why Mitt Romney’s vote to convict Trump matters, even though the Senate acquitted the president on an otherwise party line vote. The two previous presidential impeachments and trials at least swayed political and public opinion. After his impeachment and acquittal in the Senate in 1868, the incumbent President Andrew Johnson’s Democratic Party denied him the nomination for president. After House Republicans impeached Democratic President Bill Clinton William (Bill) Jefferson ClintonWhere are the leaders lifting America up? Cuomo says he would not accept a Biden Cabinet position if asked Coronavirus Report: The Hill's Steve Clemons interviews Ron Klain MORE, his approval rating jumped 10 percent, his highest ever.

Not so with Donald Trump’s impeachment and acquittal in these ferociously partisan times, even though his conduct was far worse than Johnson’s or Clinton’s. Johnson was impeached for firing a Cabinet officer in violation of a law later found to be unconstitutional. Clinton lied under oath about an extramarital affair. Trump was willing to let a vital American ally go down to defeat in its war with Russia unless it announced, notwithstanding the lack of any evidentiary justification, that it was investigating Trump’s then-leading political rival. Trump’s conduct was condemned or defended almost exclusively on a partisan basis, and public opinion barely moved.

Then Romney stepped over a San Andreas-size national political fault line. He explained his vote to convict Trump for abuse of power (he voted to acquit on the charge of obstruction of Congress) by saying that the president in fact pressured a foreign government “to corrupt” the 2020 presidential election. “Corrupting an election to keep oneself in office is perhaps the most abusive and destructive violation of one’s oath of office that I can imagine,” Romney said.

It was a moment of stunning clarity and singular courage. Romney knew that Trump and his allies would demand his “head on a pike.” Republicans immediately impugned Romney’s motives by claiming that he acted from personal animosity towards Trump, and it's only going to get worse.

ADVERTISEMENT

When I heard about Romney’s vote, I thought of Fred Rogers on “Mister Rogers’ Neighborhood” telling children that, when they saw something scary on the news, “look for the helpers. You will always find people who are helping.”

If your children saw President Trump Donald John TrumpProtesters tear down, burn statue of Confederate general in DC US attorney in NYC who spearheaded probes of Trump allies refuses to leave as DOJ pushes ouster Trump to host 4th of July event despite pleas from lawmakers to cancel MORE refuse Nancy Pelosi’s offered hand and then watched as she tore up his speech, you can point out to them Mitt Romney’s courageous vote to convict the president of abuse of power.

Gregory J. Wallance was a federal prosecutor during the Carter and Reagan administrations. He is the author most recently of “The Woman Who Fought An Empire: Sarah Aaronsohn and Her Nili Spy Ring.” Follow him on Twitter at @gregorywallance.