"Fox News Sunday" anchor Chris Wallace Christopher (Chris) WallaceChris Wallace predicts Bolton book will be 'a one-week story' that fades Schumer pans Trump executive order on police reform Chris Wallace to NY Times: 'I don't pull punches, I'm not playing favorites' MORE on Friday said it is "insane" that Rep. Eric Swalwell Eric Michael SwalwellTwitter, Facebook see new tactics in foreign disinformation efforts NASCAR bans display of Confederate flag from events and properties Gloves come off as Democrats fight for House seat in California MORE (D-Calif.) has discussed impeaching President Trump Donald John TrumpProtesters tear down, burn statue of Confederate general in DC US attorney in NYC who spearheaded probes of Trump allies refuses to leave as DOJ pushes ouster Trump to host 4th of July event despite pleas from lawmakers to cancel MORE for a second time, arguing that both Democrats and Republicans need to focus on problems facing the country instead of resorting to "politics of personal destruction."

The comments from Wallace come after Swalwell told CNN earlier this week that Democrats are "not going to take our options off the table" regarding future impeachment while discussing Trump's critical comments regarding the Roger Stone Roger Jason StoneMueller investigated whether Trump misled him on WikiLeaks question in Russia probe Mueller report re-released with fewer redactions after legal battle Prosecutor who quit Roger Stone case to testify before Congress about 'politicization' of DOJ MORE case, which House Speaker Nancy Pelosi Nancy PelosiHouse Republicans call for cutting office budgets of lawmakers who use proxy voting The Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Trump under fire as SCOTUS, Bolton deal blows Republican rift opens up over qualified immunity for police MORE (D-Calif.) called "an abuse of power" for allegedly attempt to influence a Justice Department matter.

"We’re not going to let [Trump] just torch this democracy because he thinks that he’s been let off once and we’re not going to do something about it," Swalwell added.

ADVERTISEMENT

Wallace joined Fox News radio to advise against a second impeachment, saying that "the last thing" Americans want is "to go down this road again."

"When you're hearing people like Eric Swalwell say, 'Well, maybe we're going to impeach again.' Insane, just insane," Wallace told host Chris Foster on "The Fox News Rundown" on Fox News Radio.

"Both sides need to focus on actually helping people deal with the problems that they face in this country," Wallace continued. "Whether it's the economy or jobs or education or health care or foreign policy, whatever. They need to be focusing on that and not ... staying in this kind of politics of personal destruction."

Wallace also said Trump should not have weighed in on the recommended sentencing in the Stone case, which was originally set for 7-9 years. The president commented that the length of the sentence was egregious after the recommendation was made public.

"It seems to me that most people in this country, the last thing they want to do is go down this road again," Wallace said. "And we seem to be headed, not necessarily to impeachment, but down this road of the president doing things that are very questionable. I think weighing in on the sentencing — it wasn't a guideline — it was a recommendation by prosecutors. And then the recommendation gets changed and now he's attacking the judge. I think that's all really misguided on his part."

ADVERTISEMENT

Four Justice Department prosecutors resigned from the Stone case on Tuesday after Attorney General William Barr Bill BarrUS attorney in NYC who spearheaded probes of Trump allies refuses to leave as DOJ pushes ouster Barr echoes Trump's concerns about mail-in voting, says it could 'open the floodgates of potential fraud' Mueller report re-released with fewer redactions after legal battle MORE stepped in to recommend a lower sentence than the agency recommended for lying to Congress and witness tampering.

It was later revealed on Wednesday that Tomeka Hart, a former Democratic congressional candidate, said she served as foreperson on the jury that convicted Stone on obstruction charges in November.

Several of Hart's anti-Trump tweets were then uncovered, including a March post about the Mueller investigation, which led to the charges against Stone.

A federal judge denied Stone's request for a new trial on Wednesday.