Osama bin Laden planned to assassinate President Barack Obama to unsteady the United States by putting 'totally unprepared' Joe Biden in charge.

Declassified documents seized from Bin Laden's Pakistan compound as he was killed in May 2011 reveal his plans to throw the U.S. 'into a crisis' by killing Obama while he traveled in a plane with U.S. military commander David Petraeus.

The 45-page document, which were first reported by The Washington Post in 2012, is now available in full along with hundreds of others from the raid.

Declassified documents seized from Bin Laden's (pictured) Pakistan compound as he was killed in May 2011 reveal his plans to throw the U.S. 'into a crisis' by killing Obama

Osama wrote to Al Qaeda deputy Atiyah Abd al-Rahman: 'The reason for concentrating on them is that Obama is the head of infidelity and killing him automatically will make [Vice President] Biden take over the presidency, Biden is totally unprepared for that post, which will lead the U.S. into a crisis.

'As for Petraeus, he is the man of the hour ... and killing him would alter the war's path' in Afghanistan.'

Osama's ambition was to have Ilyas Kasmiri, described by U.S. officials as Al Qaeda's military operations chief in Pakistan, shoot down the plane carrying Obama.

The aspirations never developed into further planning, the U.S. intelligence service told The Washington Post.

President Barack Obama, accompanied by General David Petraeus, at the White House in Washington, Wednesday, June 23, 2010

Detailing his plans Osama wrote: 'Please ask brother Ilyas to send me the steps he has taken into that work.'

Kasmiri was killed by a U.S. drone strike shortly after Bin Laden was killed by the U.S. special forces. Atiyah Abd al-Rahman was reportedly killed by a CIA drone strike in August of 2011.



In a description of the tense 2011 strategy session ahead of the raid which killed Bin Laden, told by Biden almost eight years ago during a retreat in Maryland for congressional Democrats, he recalled that he said: 'Mr. President, my suggestion is, don't go - we have to do two more things to see if he's there.'

Joe Biden speaks during a campaign event on Friday in Independence, Iowa. He appeared to contradict himself regarding his role in the mission to kill Osama Bin Laden

He has since changed his story about the Navy SEAL mission in a conversation with a Fox News reporter earlier this year.

'As commander in chief, if you were ever handed a piece of intelligence that said you could stop an imminent attack on Americans — but you have to use an airstrike to take out a terrorist leader — would you pull the trigger?' the reporter asked Biden.

'Well we did - the guy's name was Osama bin Laden,' replied Biden, who was vice president when bin Laden was killed.

'Didn't you tell President Obama not to go after bin Laden that day?' the reporter asked.

'No, I didn't,' Biden said.

Obama later told Mitt Romney that 'Even some in my own party, including my current vice president, had the same critique as you did', confirming Biden's position against the strike on Bin Laden in 2011, reports Fox News.