It was emotionally gripping through and through. The weavers know how to open relationships with vulnerability and they know how to build connections and move to action. Their defining feature is that they are geniuses at relationship.

This was a gathering in which it was permissible to be an angry black person. Some of the African-American participants fully ventilated their anger at injustice. It was uncomfortable and searing, but the discomfort broke through barriers and moved us closer.

Martha Welch, a professor and researcher at Columbia, pointed out that our emotional health is dependent on connection with others. We don’t just regulate emotions ourselves. We co-regulate with others and need connection with others to keep from spinning out of control.

The weavers are acutely sensitive to states of mind that can build or mar relationship: how people can feel more or less efficacy, depending on the emotional conditions in a room; how words like “social justice” and “biblical” can be good or bad depending on whom you are speaking with, and how much damage is done when people demand you use words their way, instead of asking: Well, what do you mean by that word?

There were so many acute observations about building community: “Relationship moves at the speed of trust. Social change moves at the speed of relationship.” “Neighbors are people we practice doing life with.” “I don’t fix people’s problems; I let them unfold. I respect the mystery of healing.” “We’re trying to do something that has never been done before. We’re trying to create the earth’s first mass, multicultural democratic republic.”

Alexis de Tocqueville pointed out that associational life is the central feature of American life. But somehow we in the media under-cover this sector. We barely cover the most important social change agents. These people are not goody-goody. They are raw, honest and sometimes rude.

How did we in our business get in the spot where we spend 90 percent of our coverage on the 10 percent of our lives influenced by politics and 10 percent of our coverage on the 90 percent of our lives influenced by relationship, community and the places we live in every day?