Three mass shootings in two weeks recently have left more than 30 people dead, dozens hurt, and millions of Americans once again wrestling with one of the country’s most divisive sets of issues — gun control and gun rights.

Gun regulation is a topic of frequent disagreement and debate. Throughout this nation’s history, similar debates have helped us find common ground and craft our greatest laws as we know them today. But in the age of hyper-polarized politics and internet-fueled filter bubbles, this particular debate often divides us more than it helps us. People are increasingly confident in their own beliefs, and so dismissive of others that they harbor a serious misunderstanding of the other side.

Mass shootings bring mass divide

What does ‘gun control’ mean to you? How do you define ‘gun rights’? If you’re on the political left, you probably see gun control as an effort to increase regulations on gun ownership and prevent more acts of senseless violence. You may even think conservatives aren’t interested in keeping guns out of incompetent hands. If you’re on the right, you likely see gun control as an infringement on your Second Amendment rights to protect yourself and your family. You might even think the left wants to ensure no one can have a gun, in turn equating responsible gun owners to criminals and mass murderers.

The tragedies in California, Texas and Ohio once again highlighted the vast gaps between how those on the left and right discuss guns and gun violence.

New linguistics research from Stanford University looked at differences in how Republicans and Democrats spoke online in the aftermath of mass violence. After analyzing 4.4 million tweets about 21 mass shootings between 2015 and 2018, researchers found a severely polarized social media climate.

Republican Twitter users focused on breaking news and specific facts about shootings, while Democratic users concentrated on potential policy changes. Both sides often put shootings in historical context, but Republicans most often mentioned the Sept. 11, 2001 terrorism attacks, while Democrats usually referenced the 2012 shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary in Newtown, Conn. Republicans were more likely to express disgust on Twitter, while Democrats were more likely to express sadness. If the shooter was African American, Hispanic or Middle Eastern, Republicans were 25% more likely to call them a “terrorist;” Democrats were 25% more likely to use “terrorist” if the shooter was white.

Misunderstanding the other side

People think and express beliefs in vastly different ways, due in part to their political ideology. But in the social media age, rational thinking often takes a back seat to the blunt projection of beliefs and damning rejection of dissidence. Data suggests that, at least for politically engaged news consumers and social media users, the comfort of social media filter bubbles might be hindering people’s ability to understand beliefs different from their own … or even when common ground may actually exist across divides.

A study by international initiative More in Common focused on the “perception gap” — a measure of what one group thinks another group believes, and how far those estimations are from reality. The higher the number, the larger the gap. For example, people who said they shared political content online in the past year had an average perception gap of 29. Those who didn’t had an average gap of 18.

The study showed that Democrats believe roughly 45% of Republicans think the government should do more to keep guns away from bad people; in reality, the figure is roughly 65%. Republicans inaccurately estimated that only around 40% of Democrats believe law-abiding citizens should be allowed to own guns; the actual figure was nearly 70%. Ask any Republican or Democrat you know a similar question, and it’s likely their answer will be way off.

Social media drives political perception gap

Our social “bubbles,” especially online, may be fueling the perception gap in politics. Roughly 75% of Facebook users who report their political ideology say 33% or less of their online friends have opposing beliefs. The ease with which social media users can choose who and what they want to see means we’re less likely to encounter differing viewpoints. Confirmation bias means we’re more comfortable consuming information we’re already inclined to agree with, and Facebook, Twitter and other social media companies have taken the cue; their algorithms feed users information tailored to their interests, driving revenue for ad buyers while preventing people from seeing alternative viewpoints and obscuring the bigger picture.

With so many ways to recklessly project beliefs and filter out opposing views online, people need tools to help them understand the other side rather than ignore it. Companies like AllSides are trying to make this easier. AllSides helps people break through ideological and technological filter bubbles by presenting national news and opinions from the left, center and right side-by-side, exposing readers to different perspectives — essentially the opposite of a highly filtered Facebook or Twitter news feed.

Most modern technologies reflect the fact that we’re more comfortable being exposed to ideas that are familiar or agreeable to us. But a willingness to listen to the other side in good faith is critical to ending the perception gap and healing our political divide. If Americans are to come together to solve the nation’s problems on guns or any other issue, we must begin to understand each other across differences by stepping out of our filter bubbles, not siloing ourselves into echo chambers of contentment.

Henry A. Brechter is the news editor at Allsides.com, a media and technology company that seeks to provide balanced news and track media bias. Follow AllSides on Twitter @AllSidesNow, and follow Henry @hbrechter.