Where’s Hunter Biden? That’s been a question for months. The screw-up son who admits economic opportunities come his way due to his last name and who his father is has become the weakest link of the Biden 2020 campaign. It all started with his son’s ties to a Ukraine energy company, where he was paid $50,000/month to sit on its board despite having zero experience in the energy sector. Hunter was allegedly there to sell access to top Obama officials at the time. This all occurred in 2014 when his dad, Papa Joe, the vice president, was spearheading anti-corruption efforts in the country.

Then, there’s this issue with his board position on BHR Partners, a private Chinese equity firm that’s run by Joe Biden and John Kerry’s children. Once again, we have another swampy deal, as Hunter walked out of China with a cool $1 billion contract after he took a trip there with daddy in 2013 (via WSJ):

Hunter Biden, a 49-year-old lawyer and the second son of the former vice president, owns 10% of a private-equity firm called Bohai Harvest RST (Shanghai) Equity Investment Fund Management Co. Over the past roughly six years, it has channeled $2.5 billion or more on behalf of its financial backers into automotive, energy, mining and technology deals, according to interviews with people familiar with the private-equity firm and a review by The Wall Street Journal of financial filings and other official business records. Hunter Biden is one of nine directors of the firm, known as BHR Partners, which is controlled and funded primarily by large Chinese government-owned shareholders. President Trump has alleged that Hunter Biden benefited from Chinese government largess and “walked out of China with $1.5 billion in a fund.” Mr. Trump has also drawn attention to the fact that BHR Partners was officially registered 12 days after Hunter Biden in December 2013 flew to Beijing aboard Air Force Two, while his father made an official visit as vice president.

Hunter said he would resign from the board in October, but as the Daily Caller News Foundation discovered, he’s still a board member:

In a statement issued Oct. 13 by his lawyer, Hunter Biden pledged to resign his position on BHR’s board “on or by October 31.” The statement did not say whether Hunter Biden intended to relinquish his ownership stake in the Chinese private equity firm. Hunter Biden’s pledge received widespread media coverage in The Washington Post, The New York Times and elsewhere. […] As of Tuesday, BHR’s file on China’s National Enterprise Credit Information Publicity System (NECIPS) still lists Hunter Biden as being a director of BHR. Qixinbao, an independent service that provides registration information on Chinese corporations, also listed Hunter Biden as a member of the BHR board on Tuesday.

Hunter is a mess. He has a China issue and a Ukraine one, the latter has never been fully diffused by his father’s campaign and it came up every time it was brought up, much to the irritation of the former vice president. Perhaps that’s why he was sent away because this whole thing stinks. It’s a bit odd when the response to all of this is ‘we didn’t do anything wrong, but we’ll never do it again.’ In the meantime, it's a good thing Hunter made that Burisma money since he has some serious expenditures on his docket due to fathering a love child with a stripper.

Editor's Note: Want to support Townhall so we can keep telling the truth about China? Join Townhall VIP and use the promo code WUHAN to get 25% off VIP membership!