I enjoy NBC's Keir Simmons's coverage of the royals as much as any anglophile, but he really missed the mark in his reporting on the World Health Organization. Trump recently decided to halt funding to the WHO because the body has not only turned a blind eye to China's role in the coronavirus pandemic, but they took the CCP at their word and may have even engaged in a cover-up of the outbreak.

"They had a lot of information early and they didn't want to...they seem to be very China-centric, so we're going to look into it," Trump said at the White House in April. "We pay for the majority of the money that we get."

Simmons was more interested in President Trump's shortcomings. Trump "could have" made an address at the WHO Assembly this week and made his case for why he is cutting funding to the organization, but he chose not to, Simmons regretted to his colleague Nicole Wallace.

"Another example really - we talked about this yesterday Nicole - of China really seeming to do the diplomacy better than America at this stage where President Xi steps up and gives an address," Simmons said. "We didn't know he was going to do that until hours before and kind of steals the limelight."

MSNBC’s @KeirSimmons on the WHO: “China really seemed to do the diplomacy better than America, at this stage, where President XI steps up and gives an address — we didn’t know he was going to do that, until hours before. And kind of steals the limelight." pic.twitter.com/uUWPmYVov2 — Tom Elliott (@tomselliott) May 19, 2020

The White House, Simmons added, has not provided a proposal as to how they're going to move forward with a fractured relationship with WHO.

That sentiment had Sen. Ted Cruz (R-TX) asking himself a question.

Is NBC in fact a wholly-owned subsidiary of the CCP? https://t.co/9n2eUxkugd — Ted Cruz (@tedcruz) May 19, 2020

Of course, Cruz is used to the media taking China's side. But he sees China's role in the coronavirus outbreak as clear as day. In fact, he said they are guilty on three counts. He's introduced legislation to sanction Chinese officials involved in the cover-up that led to a global pandemic.

Editor's Note: Want to support Townhall so we can keep fighting the ChiComs and tell the truth about China and the virus they unleashed on the world? Join Townhall VIP and use the promo code WUHAN to get 25% off VIP membership!