The San Francisco Board of Supervisors passed a resolution Tuesday that declares the National Rifle Association a "domestic terrorist organization."

After connecting the NRA to an "epidemic of gun violence" in the U.S., the resolution urges San Francisco to distance itself from the organization by examining local vendors' and contractors' ties to the NRA. It also says the local government should avoid doing business with the NRA or organizations associated with it.

"The National Rifle Association spreads propaganda that misinforms and aims to deceive the public about the dangers of gun violence," the resolution reads.

While supervisors will be examining San Francisco's connections to the NRA, the resolution is also meant to pave the way for similar legislation at the local, state or federal level, Supervisor Catherine Stefani, who sponsored the resolution, told USA TODAY on Wednesday.

The designation of domestic terrorist organization is justified because the NRA's opposition to gun control is "standing in the way of saving lives,” Stefani said.

She said the resolution calls the “absolutely disgraceful" organization "out for what they really are.”

The resolution says 100 Americans are killed daily by gun violence, making the U.S.'s gun homicide rate 25 times higher than any other "high-income" country.

Guns:Walmart to no longer sell certain ammunition, ask customers to stop open carry in stores

Texas shootings:Visitors at El Paso memorial ask how many more have to die after latest Texas shooting

The resolution passed unanimously, according to Daniel Herzstein, a spokesperson for Stefani's office.

The NRA condemned the resolution in a statement sent to USA TODAY Wednesday. "This is just another worthless and disgusting 'soundbite remedy' to the violence epidemic gripping our nation," spokeswoman Amy Hunter said in an emailed statement.

"This is a reckless assault on a law-abiding organization, its members, and the freedoms they all stand for. We remain undeterred - guided by our values and belief in those who want to find real solutions to gun violence," the statement says.

This is the second high-profile condemnation the NRA has issued this week. On Tuesday, the NRA said Walmart's decision to stop selling certain ammunition would hurt business and "not make us any safer."

In the wake of recent mass shootings in California, Ohio and two in Texas, national attention has again grown on the issue of gun violence.

Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., has faced particular pressure to take up gun control legislation, but has maintained that President Donald Trump should support legislation before the Senate considers it.

Trump's discussions about gun background checks with Wayne LaPierre, NRA head, made national headlines in August.

Contributing: Charisse Jones, Jeanine Santucci