“The temptation for the U.S. to exit Afghanistan grows stronger with news of every bombing and ambush inflicted on civilians, Afghan security forces or U.S. and NATO troops. But a withdrawal that doesn’t keep Afghanistan from becoming a rogue state , that fails to safeguard women’s rights, that leads to the collapse of legitimate Afghan governance, would prove disastrous — both for Afghans and, in future years, for America.” Editorial Board, Chicago Tribune

“It’s not the first time Trump, a real estate mogul and reality show star who wrote a book called ‘The Art of the Deal,’ has stumbled in his attempts to strike deals that he promised voters in 2016 would give the U.S. an edge. He has been unable to secure a new, more comprehensive nuclear deal with Iran as he promised he would do. He has met three times with North Korea’s Kim Jong Un, but has made little progress in getting Kim to abandon his nuclear arsenal. His trade talks with China are going nowhere. And while his administration did manage to come to a new trade deal with Canada and Mexico to replace the North American Free Trade Agreement, it has yet to gain approval in Congress and it’s not drastically different from NAFTA itself… “President Donald Trump’s boasts about his dealmaking skills may have helped him win in 2016. But after this weekend’s events, he has little to back up those claims on the world stage heading into 2020.” Nahal Toosi, Anita Kumar, Wesley Morgan and Victoria Guida, Politico

“ The Trump administration seems to be trying to thread an impossible needle : to cut a peace deal with the Taliban, who are demanding a total American withdrawal from Afghanistan, while at the same time ensuring that the country does not revert to what Trump has termed a ‘Harvard for terrorists,’ which a complete US withdrawal would surely help to enable. Meanwhile, the Trump administration is treating the Taliban as if the group is a government-in-waiting while simultaneously undercutting the legitimate Afghan government… “The Taliban has consistently refused to negotiate directly with the elected Afghan government, despite the fact that the outcome of their talks with the United States will deeply affect the Afghan people the Afghan government represents. The cancelled Camp David talks appear to have been an effort to bring Taliban leaders and Afghan President Ashraf Ghani together, since Ghani was also going to be attending… The winner from the canceled Camp David summit is the elected Afghan president Ghani, who will run for reelection at the end of this month and may well win. And whoever wins that election will be in a far stronger position to insist that the next round of negotiations with the Taliban must include the duly elected Afghan government.” Peter Bergen, CNN

“When he blamed his Camp David fiasco on a Taliban suicide bombing last week, which killed a US soldier and several civilians, he was probably being less than candid. It’s likely he got cold feet at the last minute about an agreement that looked dangerously ill-judged – and which could see him blamed for a resurgence in Afghanistan of both al-Qaida and Islamic State. This snakes-and-ladders diplomacy mirrors his much-hyped, on-off talks with North Korea and his up-and-down stance on Iran, where he has blown hot and cold over a summit with Hassan Rouhani, Iran’s president.” Simon Tisdall, The Guardian

“It’s appalling that Trump would have even considered hosting Taliban leaders just days before the anniversary of the 9/11 attacks plotted by their ally, Osama bin Laden. Imagine what Trump — who excoriated President Barack Obama for negotiating with the Taliban — would have said if Obama had invited them for a sleepover. But Trump’s explanation for the cancellation — as with most things he says — makes little sense … the Taliban never agreed to a cease-fire. It is bizarre to call off negotiations because the other side continues doing something it never agreed to stop doing… The Afghanistan mess confirms what has been obvious from the start… Trump is a better dealbreaker than dealmaker.” Max Boot, Washington Post

From the Right

The right is divided about negotiating with the Taliban.

The right is divided about negotiating with the Taliban.

“Trump made the right call. The Taliban proved they are currently unwilling to negotiate seriously… This does not, however, change the crucial importance of diplomacy in Afghanistan. We cannot fight our way to victory in Afghanistan. A peace deal with the Taliban will ultimately be necessary. But Trump's decision reflects a recognition that peace requires more than words. True peace requires the shared goodwill of both parties to sustain it. Until the Taliban changes its mind, American must continue to defend our interests in Afghanistan…



“American and NATO efforts in Afghanistan are now centered on counter-terrorism and supporting Afghan security forces with logistics, training, planning, intelligence, and aviation support. The Trump administration is also employing a long overdue pressure strategy toward Pakistan… An unconditional withdrawal from Afghanistan would inspire Salafi-Jihadist confidence around the world, and invite the Taliban to help rebuild al Qaeda. It would betray our allies abroad and endanger us at home. Maintaining military pressure on the Taliban while strengthening the Afghan government is a far better course. It strengthens us while incentivizing the Taliban to pursue what is most needed: a serious peace.”

Tom Rogan, Washington Examiner

“The Taliban has been killing indiscriminately for decades in its quest to gain, hold, and regain power. Did Trump not understand this? What did he think the Taliban is, an agrarian reform group?… The Taliban wants to be seen as driving the U.S. out of Afghanistan under extreme duress. It wants our exit to look more like Vietnam than Iraq (under President Obama). By driving us out in this way, the Taliban can claim, correctly, to have avenged the victory we achieved under President Bush when we drove the Taliban from power. It can also claim to be the true successor to the various Afghan groups that have defeated invading powers down through the centuries.”

Paul Mirengoff, Power Line Blog

Some suggest that “Mr. Trump might be tempted to resume talks with the Taliban, but he should be in no hurry… Critics who complain about ‘forever wars’ overlook that the U.S. has had troops deployed in Europe since World War II and in Korea since the armistice of 1953. These deployments have helped to keep the peace with limited American casualties…



“There is no domestic political clamor for the U.S. to withdraw all troops, especially with casualties low. The political harm for Mr. Trump would be far greater if a pullout triggered the collapse of the Afghan government and a humanitarian tragedy. A revived terrorist sanctuary in Afghanistan would also erase the political benefit for Mr. Trump from destroying the ISIS caliphate in Syria. The jihadist movement world-wide would declare a great victory… You can’t have a successful peace negotiation if one side has no interest in peace.”

Editorial Board, Wall Street Journal

Others, however, argue that “many of the same people who now vociferously protest against a political deal with the Taliban are some of the very same geniuses who believed that enough airpower and time could sway the insurgency into watering down its demands or defeat them outright… Let there be no mistake: if the Taliban is stupid enough to allow Al Qaeda or the Islamic State to plan terrorist attacks against the U.S. homeland or U.S. interests overseas, they can expect a tenfold military response… There is nothing in the agreement that prohibits Washington from exercising the right of self-defense, and the Taliban should be under no illusions about the willingness of Trump—or any future U.S. president—to authorize the full weight of the U.S. military if the situation requires it.”

Daniel R. DePetris, The National Interest