From the Left

The left opposes revoking the waiver, arguing that the move will harm the environment and is unlikely to hold up in court.

“In announcing on Wednesday his determination to revoke California’s longstanding authority to set its own air pollution standards, President Trump finds himself arrayed against the plain language of the Clean Air Act, California’s historical role as a laboratory for tough new environmental rules and the express wishes of several major automakers and two-thirds of the American people.”

Editorial Board, New York Times

“Trump’s officials are on shaky legal ground here. The waiver has been litigated before and withstood the challenge… it [also] seems hard to argue some companies negotiating a deal with California’s regulators are colluding while the automakers and oil companies collectively lobbying the federal administration to change the law are not.”

Liam Denning, Bloomberg“The move to punish California comes as the state publicly spars with Trump over the White House's plan to roll back Obama-era emissions standards, which analyses suggest would lead to more deaths, higher prices for consumers, and emit somewhere between 321 million and 931 million metric tons of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere through 2035.… [Moreover] the auto industry has told Trump that it doesn't actually want the weaker emission standards he's proposed.”

Alison Durkee, Vanity Fair

“Firms should argue to courts that collective action to save the planet is a good defense against any antitrust complaint. A virtue of U.S. antitrust law is that its core statute, the 1890 Sherman Antitrust Act, finds its interpretation principally in judicial rulings and not in statute. Courts thus have the power to declare that the imperative of winning the battle against climate change bars public or private antitrust action against collaborating firms. As soon as business can find the right test case, it should collectively seek a definitive ruling from the highest court… Let the collaboration begin.”

Reed Hundt, Washington Post