Mrs. Clinton, for all her reservations, has been willing to move only so far.

“Politicians were more comfortable saying ‘civil unions’ before they were comfortable saying ‘gay marriage,’ ” Mr. Sarat said. “I think that’s what you see in the Hillary Clinton kind of approach.”

The scrutiny of the death penalty is part of a broader look at the wisdom of the country’s criminal justice policies, a discussion motivated in part by concerns over how racial minorities are treated. The parties have found common ground in the need for criminal justice changes, with Democrats and Republicans alike speaking of their desire to reduce the country’s prison population.

The use of the death penalty has changed significantly since Mr. Clinton was weighing the fate of Mr. Rector, who had killed two people, including a police officer, and then shot himself, destroying part of his brain. Jeff Rosenzweig, a lawyer for Mr. Rector, contended that he was “in the vernacular, a zombie,” too impaired to grasp the punishment he was about to receive, and that “his execution would be remembered as a disgrace to the state.”

Mr. Rector, who saved a helping of pecan pie from his last meal so he could eat it later, was put to death by lethal injection, and the next day, Mr. Clinton said he respected death penalty opponents’ right to their opinions. “All I ask is that you respect mine,” he added, “for I have spent most of my public life worrying about what it would take to give our children a safe place to live again.”

Last year, only seven states conducted executions, according to the Death Penalty Information Center, and the number of people executed, 35, was the lowest in 20 years.

In his address to Congress in September, Pope Francis argued for the death penalty’s abolition, saying, “Every life is sacred.” And last month, the National Association of Evangelicals, which represents more than 45,000 churches and had for decades stood in support of capital punishment, adopted a resolution affirming that “evangelical Christians differ in their beliefs about capital punishment.”