Two more people corroborated some of Tara Reade’s claims that the former Vice President Joe Biden sexually assaulted her 27 years ago when she was a staffer in his Senate office, according to a report.

One person, who knew Reade in 1993, told the Associated Press that Reade mentioned the alleged assault when it happened.

The second person, who met Reade a decade after the alleged assault, confirmed having a conversation with Reade in 2007 or 2008 in which Reade talked about experiencing sexual harassment from Biden while working in his Senate office.

Both sources spoke anonymously to protect their families’ privacy, the report said.

That makes four people who have backed Reade’s some details of Reade’s claims.

Lynda LaCasse, a former neighbor of Reade’s in California, said Reade shared details about the alleged assault in the 1990s, while Lorraine Sanchez, a former colleague, told Business Insider that Reade complained to her about being sexually harassed by her former boss in Washington.

Reade was among eight women who claimed Biden made them feel uncomfortable with inappropriate displays of affection.

In an interview with the AP published on Saturday, Reade said she filed a limited report with a congressional personnel office but it did not explicitly accuse Biden of sexual assault or harassment.

“I remember talking about him wanting me to serve drinks because he liked my legs and thought I was pretty and it made me uncomfortable,” Reade said in the interview. “I know that I was too scared to write about the sexual assault.”

Although she did not use the phrase “sexual harassment” in the complaint, she did use the words “uncomfortable” and “retaliation.”

Biden, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, denied the incident ever happened during an interview Friday on MSNBC’s “Morning Joe.”

“It is not true. I’m saying it unequivocally – it never happened. It didn’t. It never happened,” Biden said.

He also said Reade did not raise concerns with supervisors or senior staffers at the time.

“News organizations that have talked with literally dozens of former staffers have not found one — not one — who corroborated her allegations in any way,” he wrote in the statement released before the interview.

“Indeed, many of them spoke to the culture of an office that would not have tolerated harassment in any way — as indeed I would not have,” he added.