Senator Bernie Sanders’ fiercest backers are furious at senior officials and supporters of the Democratic Party over their silence in the face of sexual assault allegations made against the presumptive nominee Joe Biden by a former Senate staffer.

Biden, the former vice president, is being accused by Tara Reade of forcibly kissing her, groping her, and digitally penetrating her when she served as an aide to the then-senator from Delaware in 1993.

Biden has denied the allegations.

Reade filed an official criminal complaint against the now presumptive Democratic presidential frontrunner on April 9.

Supporters of Senator Bernie Sanders (left) of Vermont are demanding that Democratic Party officials remove Joe Biden (right) from the presidential race after a former Senate staffer of his alleged he sexually assaulted her in 1993

Former Biden staffer Tara Reade claims she was sexually assaulted by the then-senator from Delaware in 1993 when she was in her 20s. She claimed she complained to her superiors in Biden's office but got nowhere. A new clip with appears to show her mother speaking to Larry King after the alleged assault could back Reade's claims that she reported the assault in 1993

On Thursday, a 27-year-old clip from CNN’s Larry King Live shows the talk show host taking a phone call from Reade’s mother which suggests that Reade told others at the time of the alleged assault.

The latest evidence to emerge shows Reade's mother Jeanette Altimus calling into King’s show in August 1993, the same month that Reade left Biden's staff, and anonymously asking a panel's advice on her daughter's 'problems' with a 'prominent senator.’

There is no mention of sexual assault in the clip.

Reade, who was in her 20s at the time of the alleged assault, had previously revealed Altimus called into the show when she told her about the sexual assault claims 27 years ago but was unable to remember the exact date or year of the phone call.

When news of her official complaint against Biden first emerged, Reade said she had told her mother, brother and a friend about the assault at the time. She said her mother urged her to go to the police.

Shaun King, a Sanders surrogate, said on Twitter that prominent Democrats won't speak up in support of Reade because 'they think it will help Trump'

A professor who is an expert on sexual trauma tweeted that he found Reade's allegations 'credible' and that Biden should quit the race

Krystal Ball, a media personality and Sanders supporter, said the new revelations bolster Reade's credibility

Journalist Glenn Greenwald tweeted that 'liberals are destroying all the #MeToo progress right before your eyes in order to protect Biden and trash his accuser as an unstable liar'

Peter Daou, a Sanders supporter, called on Biden to withdraw from the race

Nathan Robinson, a journalist with left-wing outlet Current Affairs, called on Democrats to take Reade's allegations seriously

Briahna Joy Gray, Sanders' former national press secretary, tweeted: 'Corporate Democrats chose Biden'

Her brother Collin Moulton and the anonymous friend confirmed this, but Altimus died in 2016.

Sanders’ supporters who make up the progressive wing of the Democratic Party took to social media and demanded that Biden resign.

Biden is all but assured the nomination after Sanders, the senator from Vermont, dropped out of the race and endorsed the former vice president.

Sanders said he would remain on the ballot in the remaining primary states in order to boost his influence over the Democratic Party platform during this year’s convention.

On Twitter, where Sanders’ backers are considered most vocal, supporters of the senator reacted with fury over the latest revelations in the Reade story.

By Saturday afternoon, the hashtag #DropOutBiden was trending on Twitter.

Many point out that the Democratic Party mobilized en masse to try and derail the confirmation of Brett Kavanaugh to the Supreme Court after decades-old allegations of sexual misconduct surfaced.

The lack of attention given to the Reade allegations are likely due to the fact that Biden is ahead in polls against the incumbent, President Trump, and that defeating the Republican in November is paramount to anything else, observers say.

Glenn Greenwald, the journalist from The Intercept who is a critic of Biden and a supporter of Sanders, tweeted: ‘Liberals are destroying all the #MeToo progress right before your eyes in order to protect Biden and trash his accuser as an unstable liar.

The 1993 clip shows an anonymous caller form California speak to Larry King about her daughter's problem with a 'prominent senator'. Reade said it is her mother's voice

The anonymous caller asked the panel whether her daughter should go to the press but they did not offer any advice. Reade had mentioned her mother's call in previous interviews

‘Nobody is going to tolerate sex assault accusations and “Believe Women!” dictates be weaponized & used so manipulatively for partisan ends.’

Nathan J. Robinson, the editor of the left-wing magazine Current Affairs, tweeted: ‘I am trying to WARN Democrats, before Biden has actually been nominated, that they face a potential huge problem in November.

‘Why do you think Trump hasn’t mentioned this [allegation] yet?

‘He is smart enough to know he should wait to use it until Democrats can’t replace Biden.’

Peter Daou, a Sanders supporter and former adviser to ex-Secretary of State John Kerry, called on Biden to withdraw, tweeting: ‘Credible rape accusations are disqualifying or we have NO moral standards.’

'In 1993 the mother of Tara Reade was so disturbed by what her daughter told her @JoeBiden did to her, & the lack of help she said she got from his staff, that she called Larry King to talk about it the week Tara stopped working for him,' said activist and prominent Sanders surrogate Shaun King.

'TARA READE IS TELLING THE TRUTH', tweeted actress and #MeToo advocate Rose McGowan.

Others highlighted that the new clip provides evidence that Reade complained to Biden's office in 1993.

'This is an important piece of additional reporting further bolstering the claims of #TaraReade, and undermining the story that has been told by the Biden campaign that no one EVER complained of harassment in his office,' wrote The Hill reporter Krystal Ball.

'Will @UDelaware release the records??'

The University confirmed the records 'will remain closed to the public until two years after Mr. Biden retires from public life', according to journalist Rich McHugh.

Briahna Joy Gray, who was national press secretary for Sanders’ presidential campaign, tweeted: ‘Progressives didn’t make this happen. Corporate Democrats chose Biden.’

The 1993 clip from Larry King Live was discovered by The Intercept and Reade confirmed that it was her mother's voice on Twitter.

'I remember it being an anonymous call and her saying my daughter was sexually harassed and retaliated against and fired, where can she go for help? I was mortified,' Reade told The Intercept.

The CNN clip does not reference sexual harassment or anyone being fired but features an anonymous woman asking if her daughter should go to the press because of problems with a senator.

The interview featured in a program King aired on August 11, 1993, titled, 'Washington: The Cruelest City on Earth?' and the caller was identified as a woman dialing in from San Luis Obispo, California.

Records show that August 1993 was he last month Reade worked with Biden's office and that Altimus was living in San Luis Obispo County at the time.

'I'm wondering what a staffer would do besides go to the press in Washington?' the caller asked.

'My daughter has just left there, after working for a prominent senator, and could not get through with her problems at all, and the only thing she could have done was go to the press, and she chose not to do it out of respect for him.'

The panel did not offer any suggestions or advice to the caller but talked about whether they would leak news on a rival to the press.

Reade responded to the clip on Twitter, identifying the voice as her mother's.

'This is my mom. I miss her so much and her brave support of me,' she wrote.

'I discussed the Larry King call w reporters last year and on Katie Halper publicly. Thank you for posting.

'I miss my mom as she died 4 years ago. Her indignation of how I was treated prompted her to reach out in 1993.

'Thank you to those who found the Larry King episode I told reporters about.

'My mother was so brave and supportive. It has been an emotional day to hear her voice again. How I wish she knew how much I appreciated her love hug your mother if you can.'

Tara Reade filed the complaint about the alleged assault with the Washington Metropolitan Police Department in Washington, D.C. on April 9 after going public with her story in March.

She revealed that the statute of limitations on the allegation had passed, but that 'there is justice in just being heard in a dignified way.'

Reade posted an image on social media of what she looked like in 1993, the year she alleged Biden sexually assaulted her. A new clip has emerged that appears to back her claims that she told her mother, brother and a friend about the alleged assault when it happened in 1993

Reade confirmed the voice on Larry King was her mother, Jeanette Altimus

Just before filing the complaint on April 9, Reade said in a tweet (pictured) that those who 'silence sexual assault & sexual harassment survivors' are complicit in the alleged abuse, without naming whom she was referring to. Biden has denied the accusations

Reade was among the women who came out last year alleging Biden was too handsy but did not make her allegation of sexual assault until speaking with journalist Katie Halper for her 'Katie Halper Show' podcast on March 25.

Reade told Halper that the assault occurred after she was told to deliver a gym bag to the then-senator. Reade said she tracked down Biden on Capitol Hill and he remembered her name.

'And then we were alone. And it was the strangest thing. There was no, like, exchange really, he just had me up against the wall,' she said.

She said she was wearing a work skirt, but no pantyhose.

'He just had me up against the wall and the wall was cold,' she said. 'His hands were on me and underneath my clothes. He went down my skirt and then up inside it and he penetrated me with his fingers. He was kissing me at the same time,' she said.

She said that when she 'pulled back,' Biden 'looked annoyed.'

Reade said Biden said to her, 'Come on man, I heard you liked me.'

'He implied that I had done this,' she told the podcast host.

At first Reade didn't want to mention the other quote that got stuck in her head, but then she told Halper what it was.

'You're nothing to me,' she claimed the senator said to her. 'Nothing.'

Reade said that she had attempted to bring up her concerns about the alleged assault to her superiors in Biden's office but got nowhere, a claim that the new clip of her mother appears to back.

She had previously said that in 1993 Biden, then still a senator from Delaware, touched her several times and made her feel uncomfortable.

Reade also said her duties were cut after she refused to serve drinks at an event. Biden, she claims, had wanted her serving because he liked her legs. The former staffer said she later felt pushed out and left in August 1993 after only nine months.

Former Vice President Biden has vehemently denied Reade's claims she was sexually assaulted

Biden and his campaign have fiercely denied the claims.

'Women have the right to tell their story, and reporters have an obligation to rigorously vet those claims,' Deputy Campaign Manager and Communications Director Kate Bedingfield said.

'We encourage them to do so, because these accusations are false.

'Vice President Biden has dedicated his public life to changing the culture and the laws around violence against women. He authored and fought for the passage and reauthorization of the landmark Violence Against Women Act. He firmly believes that women have a right to be heard — and heard respectfully,' she told Politico.

'Such claims should also be diligently reviewed by an independent press. What is clear about this claim: it is untrue. This absolutely did not happen.'

The newly discovered clip drew much attention on social media and was shared by the likes of Donald Trump Jr.

'OMG. Even today's media will have a hard time not covering this, but they will try desperately.' he wrote.

'Joe Biden isn't sheltering in place in his basement bunker because of the pandemic, he's hiding from Tara Reade.'