Foreign nationals living illegally in Minneapolis, Minnesota, are eligible for financial assistance programs that are intended to help small businesses and families struggling with the coronavirus pandemic.

Democratic Minneapolis Mayor Jacob Frey, in conjunction with the Minneapolis City Council, announced earlier in April that more than $5 million would be allocated from the city’s coffers to help local residents and employers feeling the pinch from the coronavirus lockdown. The rescue package specifically dedicates several million dollars to emergency housing assistance to low-income individuals.

However, a look at the program’s guidelines revealed that the eligibility requirements are quite vague.

To qualify for the emergency housing assistance program, a family must: live within Minneapolis city limits, have incomes of 30% of the area medium income or lower, and have experienced a “significant loss” of income from the COVID-19 emergency.

Living unlawfully in the city is not a disqualifying factor for the funds. In fact, the guidelines specifically state that “households are eligible irrespective of immigration or documentation status.”

What’s up for grabs? Recipients will receive funds depending on their “individual needs of the household,” but generally they can receive as much as $1,500 per household, or up to $2,000 under “extraordinary circumstances.”

It doesn’t appear that residents will personally receive payments, but instead the city will pay rental property owners and utility companies directly, per the city’s description of the program. (RELATED: Ayanna Pressley: Next Coronavirus Stimulus Should Support Illegal Immigrants)

When asked by the Daily Caller News Foundation on Thursday how Minneapolis officials will verify if illegal aliens applicants meet the income and residency requirements, a spokesperson for the city was unable to immediately provide an answer, but said it would “have additional details on application logistics soon.”

Minneapolis is not the only city or state that is providing financial assistance to illegal aliens amid the coronavirus pandemic.

Chicago Mayor Lori Lightfoot, a Democrat, signed an executive order Tuesday that allows illegal migrants to tap into the city’s Housing Assistance Grant program, a $100 million Chicago Small Business Resiliency Fund to help small businesses, and an online resources program for students.

Democratic California Gov. Gavin Newsom, who is already providing millions in economic assistance to businesses owned by illegal aliens, confirmed that he is in talks with state legislators to establish a “Disaster Relief Fund” for those living unlawfully in the state.

Content created by The Daily Caller News Foundation is available without charge to any eligible news publisher that can provide a large audience. For licensing opportunities of our original content, please contact licensing@dailycallernewsfoundation.org.