Martin Luther King III

Opinion contributor

On March 7, 1965, some 600 civil rights activists marched in Selma, Alabama, demanding an end to racial discrimination. The demonstration was led by now-Rep. John Lewis and Hosea Williams, who worked with my father, Martin Luther King Jr.

As the peaceful and nonviolent protesters crossed the Edmund Pettus Bridge, they were met with tear gas and billy clubs. This dark day in America’s history is remembered as "Bloody Sunday."

Last week, just two days shy of the 55-year anniversary of Bloody Sunday, Alabama executed Nathaniel Woods, a black man, for a crime he indisputably did not commit. Though he was convicted for the tragic deaths of three Birmingham police officers in 2004, he never had a fair trial, and the real gunman stated that Woods was completely innocent. Despite these alarming truths and many pleas to reconsider the decision, Woods was put to death.

It would seem to me, at this point in time, that we would have learned more from the past. There is no doubt that in many ways we have made progress, but we also cannot deny the horrific phenomenons that still plague our nation — the broken justice system that favors white men, institutionalized racism across all levels of society and the immoral brutalities facing communities of color. This is especially true in Alabama, where I was born, and across the South.

The decisions surrounding Woods' execution made a mockery of justice and constitutional guarantees. It’s unfathomable that Gov. Kay Ivey and the U.S. Supreme Court would not budge. Putting anyone to death, especially when there is any inkling of a chance that they are innocent, is fundamentally wrong.

Growing up traveling the nation with my father to fight the same injustices in the 1950s and 1960s, it feels incredibly chilling to still be witness to such utter inhumanity and racial violence today. It sometimes feels like this nation has forgotten all about its history.

It’s sad to know that Woods' story is not unique. Black women and men are still being, for all intents and purposes, lynched to this day, and many of the incidents go unnoticed. How we choose to approach this atrocious and un-American reality is up to us — whether we stand up for justice, or whether we remain silent.

It’s easy to feel pessimistic or even hopeless at times, especially in cases like Woods'. Or it might feel safer to simply stay out of it. Either way, whenever these doubts arise I am reminded of my father’s words.

“The ultimate measure of a man is not where he stands in moments of comfort and convenience, but where he stands at times of challenge and controversy," he wrote in his book "Strength to Love."

In a 1968 speech, dad also shared that "on some positions, cowardice asks the question, is it expedient? And then expedience comes along and asks the question, is it politic? Vanity asks the question, is it popular? Conscience asks the question, is it right? There comes a time when one must take the position that is neither safe nor politic nor popular, but he must do it because conscience tells him it is right.”

Woods cannot be brought back, but in his honor — in his memory — we can choose to rise against these injustices and demand a system that is fair and humane for everyone, whether black or white, old or young, rich or poor, Latin American or Asian American or Native American.

We’re no longer on the Edmund Pettus Bridge in 1965. We’re in 2020 now, and it’s time for justice to finally prevail.

Martin Luther King III is a human rights leader and the eldest son of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Coretta Scott King. He served as the fourth president of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference and has worked with communities and heads of state on six continents, including in South Africa, India, Israel and Palestine, Australia, and the United States with Presidents Jimmy Carter and Barack Obama.