President Trump Donald John TrumpProtesters tear down, burn statue of Confederate general in DC US attorney in NYC who spearheaded probes of Trump allies refuses to leave as DOJ pushes ouster Trump to host 4th of July event despite pleas from lawmakers to cancel MORE on Wednesday urged Sen. Bernie Sanders Bernie SandersOvernight Defense: Navy won't reinstate fired captain | Dems probe use of federal officers in DC | Air Force appoints woman as top noncommissioned officer Jamaal Bowman raises M, launches 0,000 ad buy ahead of New York primary Dems request watchdog probe use of federal law enforcement in DC during Floyd protests MORE's supporters to join the Republican Party after the independent Vermont senator announced he was suspending his bid for the Democratic presidential nomination.

Trump also thanked Sen. Elizabeth Warren Elizabeth WarrenJamaal Bowman raises M, launches 0,000 ad buy ahead of New York primary Poll: Majority of Americans oppose changing military bases named after Confederate leaders 'The Senate could certainly use a pastor': Georgia Democrat seeks to seize 'moral moment' MORE (D-Mass.), reiterating his belief that she may have taken away enough votes from Sanders on Super Tuesday last month to cost him states. Warren finished third or in some cases a distant fourth in each state Joe Biden Joe BidenSusan Rice calls Trump administration 'racist to its core,' says Senate backers belong in 'trash heap of history' Trump mocks Biden event that practiced social distancing Trump to visit Arizona, Wisconsin next week MORE won on Super Tuesday.

"Bernie Sanders is OUT! Thank you to Elizabeth Warren. If not for her, Bernie would have won almost every state on Super Tuesday!" Trump tweeted.

ADVERTISEMENT

"This ended just like the Democrats & the DNC wanted, same as the Crooked Hillary fiasco," he added. "The Bernie people should come to the Republican Party, TRADE!"

Bernie Sanders is OUT! Thank you to Elizabeth Warren. If not for her, Bernie would have won almost every state on Super Tuesday! This ended just like the Democrats & the DNC wanted, same as the Crooked Hillary fiasco. The Bernie people should come to the Republican Party, TRADE! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) April 8, 2020

Sanders's decision to suspend his campaign paves the way for Biden to secure the Democratic presidential nomination.

The president has sought for months to stoke tensions within the Democratic Party around Sanders's candidacy. He has repeatedly suggested the party establishment was attempting to "steal" the nomination from the progressive senator, though Wednesday's tweet marked his most explicit outreach to potentially disaffected Sanders supporters.

Trump continued to tweet as Sanders delivered remarks about his decision. The president questioned the senator's decision to remain on the ballot to collect delegates and exert influence over the Democratic platform, and he later suggested some of Sanders's most progressive allies would not back Biden.

ADVERTISEMENT

"Can’t see AOC plus 3 supporting Sleepy Joe!" Trump tweeted, referencing Reps. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Alexandria Ocasio-CortezJamaal Bowman raises M, launches 0,000 ad buy ahead of New York primary Warren endorses Booker in Kentucky Senate primary Texas lawmaker endorses Eliot Engel MORE (D-N.Y.), Ilhan Omar Ilhan OmarThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump signs police reform executive order Omar announces father's death from coronavirus complications Lawmakers see some common ground on police reform proposals MORE (D-Minn.), Rashida Tlaib Rashida Harbi TlaibWins by young progressives start reshaping establishment How language is bringing down Donald Trump Defunding the police: Put it to a vote MORE (D-Mich.) and Ayanna Pressley Ayanna PressleyThe Hill's Campaign Report: Progressive candidates face make-or-break moment ahead Pressley endorses Booker in Kentucky Senate primary Pressley endorses Bowman in primary race against Engel MORE (D-Mass.). Pressley supported Warren's candidacy, while the other three lawmakers were Sanders surrogates.

Can’t see AOC plus 3 supporting Sleepy Joe! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) April 8, 2020

Trump and Sanders — whom the president has dubbed "Crazy Bernie" — have some overlapping policy views on trade and both rode populist waves in 2016 to become front-runners in their respective primaries.

ADVERTISEMENT

But Sanders has been among the harshest critics of Trump's presidency, labeling him a racist and a liar and more recently chastising him for his handling of the coronavirus pandemic.

Updated at 12:21 p.m.