“The 360” shows you diverse perspectives on the day’s top stories and debates.

What’s happening

In the span of three days, Joe Biden received endorsements from a trio of the Democratic Party’s most prominent voices, as his presidential campaign shifts from the primary to the upcoming general election against Donald Trump.

The first endorsement came from Sen. Bernie Sanders, Biden’s chief rival in the primary. Sanders called for the party to come together to defeat Trump, whom he called “the most dangerous president in the modern history of this country.” The duo also announced the creation of six “working groups” to help find middle ground between Biden’s more moderate policies and Sanders’s progressive platform.

A day later, Barack Obama formally endorsed Biden, saying his former vice president “has the character and the experience to guide us through one of our darkest times and heal us through a long recovery.”

On Wednesday, Sen. Elizabeth Warren threw her support behind Biden as well. Biden now has the backing of each significant competitor in the primary, plus a long list of lawmakers and former high-ranking officials.

Why there’s debate

This string of endorsements could provide Biden a significant boost in the general election, some political analysts argue. Many in the progressive wing of the party — particularly Sanders supporters — have been intensely critical of Biden throughout the campaign for his moderate policies and tenure in the Senate. Sanders and Warren throwing their support behind Biden could help alleviate that skepticism among more liberal Democrats. Partnering with Sanders on policy may also signal to progressive voters that they have a voice in the Democratic Party.

Obama’s endorsement could also make a difference. The former president is extremely popular among Democrats, and his support could help drive turnout in groups that Biden likely needs to win in November. The endorsement also bolsters the Biden campaign’s narrative that he represents a continuation of Obama’s legacy, some argue.

Others are skeptical that these endorsements will have much of an impact. Many in the left wing of the party are so staunchly opposed to Biden that even the backing of the progressive movement’s standard-bearers won’t convince them. The influential group Democratic Socialists of America announced it would not be supporting Biden following Sanders’s endorsement. This same group also holds a less favorable view of the Obama presidency and is less likely to be swayed by his support of Biden. The timing of the endorsements, in the midst of a pandemic that is drowning out all other news, may also stunt their impact, some argue.

What’s next

As he looks to shore up support within the left wing of the party, Biden has reportedly been in contact with Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and other young lawmakers in “the Squad.” Ocasio-Cortez said she hopes to have some “policy conversation” with Biden and his team before formally endorsing his candidacy.

Perspectives

The endorsements were an important show of unity

“Obama’s speech underscored that Democrats are far less divided than their primary battle suggested. From health care to climate change to economic inequality, Democrats have moved across the board in a more progressive direction. Obama has done so himself because he sees openings for social reform now that he didn’t have when he was in office.” — E.J. Dionne Jr., Washington Post

Policy changes, not endorsements, are needed to win over progressive voters

“Their lingering skepticism of Biden signals an emerging pressure campaign to score key policy concessions from the former vice president, a relative moderate who for months fought off criticism from progressives that his platform and political history were out of step with a younger, more liberal Democratic coalition.” — Max Greenwood, The Hill

Sanders carries major sway over progressive Democrats

“Normally, it’s not particularly important when one candidate in a primary endorses another. But Sanders is not a normal candidate. He inspires passionate support and he doesn’t identify as a member of the Democratic Party. Some of his voters won’t automatically shift their support to another Democrat.” — David Leonhardt, New York Times