Sen. Rand Paul is poised to roil the Senate impeachment trial Thursday as he attempts again to publicly name the person who filed a whistleblower complaint against President Trump.

Supreme Court Chief Justice John Roberts, who is presiding over the trial, reportedly blocked Paul on Wednesday from offering a question containing the name of a CIA analyst who has been conjectured to be the whistleblower. Thursday is the final day of a question-and-answer period in Trump’s trial.

Paul was heard complaining on the Senate floor Wednesday night about Roberts.

“I don’t want to have to stand up to try and fight for recognition,” Paul reportedly fumed from the floor. “If I have to fight for recognition, I will.”

On Thursday, he told The Post: “We have a question at one o’clock. Come up to the gallery, it will be fun to watch.”

But Paul denies anonymously sourced reports that his question had been blocked by Roberts. ” None of that has happened so far, I don’t think that’s been accurate. I think there has been some screening but mine has not been screened nor prevented from coming forward and it will come forward at one o’clock” Paul said.

The precise mechanism for Roberts vetting questions is unclear. Harvard Law School professor emeritus Alan Dershowitz, a member of Trump’s defense team who was sitting near Roberts when reports emerged of a blocked question, was perplexed about the possibility of question screening.

“I couldn’t imagine who would screen them,” Dershowitz told The Post. Questions are offered by senators and physically walked up to the chief justice before the inquiry is posed to either House Democrats or Trump’s defense team.

The whistleblower’s complaint about Trump pressuring Ukraine to investigate Democrats triggered the process that resulted in Trump’s impeachment.

In a late-night email, Paul spokesman Sergio Gor said he had nothing more to share, but to expect “more tomorrow.”

Trump and many Republican legislators have excoriated the whistleblower as biased against him, and some Republicans say the man’s possible coordination with House Democrats and alleged work history with former Vice President Joe Biden, whom Trump asked Ukraine to investigate, are worthy of review.

Trump and House Intelligence Committee Republicans have conceded they don’t know for certain the whistleblower’s identity and a man in his early 30s identified by some news outlets has not publicly commented on the allegation.

The lead Democratic impeachment manager Rep. Adam Schiff (D-Calif.) said the person should not be outed.

“We protect whistleblowers. We need their cooperation. We need their support in making our country work,” Schiff told reporters. “The only point in outing this whistleblower is to satisfy the desire of the president for retribution.”