President Trump lauded his legal team on Sunday, saying it “shredded” the arguments of Democrats, the day after White House lawyers made their first presentation in the Senate impeachment trial.

“The Impeachment Hoax is a massive election interference the likes of which has never been seen before. In just two hours the Radical Left, Do Nothing Democrats have seen their phony case absolutely shredded,” Trump posted on Twitter.

“Shifty is now exposed for illegally making up my phone call, & more!,” the president wrote, using his favorite nickname to refer to Rep. Adam Schiff.

Moments after the first tweet, Trump posted another about Schiff.

“Shifty Adam Schiff is a CORRUPT POLITICIAN, and probably a very sick man. He has not paid the price, yet, for what he has done to our Country!” the president said.

Schiff, the chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, played a prominent role in the House’s impeachment inquiry and is leading the Democrats’ legal team in the Senate trial.

As he did on Saturday, the president tweeted about the trial while retweeting messages from supporters.

Trump’s lawyers on Saturday claimed the Democrats hid or left out evidence that shows the president did nothing wrong when he asked Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelesnky to announce an investigation into Joe Biden and his son, Hunter.

“We intend to show you some of the evidence that they . . . decided over three days and 24 hours that they didn’t have enough time, or made a decision not to show you,” White House counsel Pat Cipollone told the Senators on Saturday, during the two-hour presentation.

The legal team also said the Democrats effort to impeachment Trump is just an attempt to overturn the results of the 2016 presidential election.

“They’re here to perpetrate the most massive interference in an election in American history,” Cipollone said. “And we can’t allow that to happen.”

Saturday was the first chance Trump’s lawyers had to rebut the case put forward by Schiff and House Democrats during their presentations Wednesday, Thursday and Friday.

The White House team gave a two-hour preview on Saturday of the case it expects to make when the impeachment trial reconvenes on Monday.

Once their presentation wraps up on Tuesday, senators will have 16 hours to submit written questions to both legal teams.