House Judiciary Committee Chairman Jerry Nadler said he was ready to subpoena former Trump national security adviser John Bolton over the Ukraine military aid affair.

"I think it’s likely, yes," that the committee’s investigation would continue and that a subpoena for Bolton is "likely," the New York Democrat told reporters on Wednesday.

President Trump was impeached by House Democrats for two articles of impeachment, abuse of power and obstruction of Congress, and is expected to be acquitted by the Senate Wednesday. Senate Republicans blocked calling for further witnesses in the Senate impeachment trial, which could have included Bolton and acting White House chief of staff Mick Mulvaney.

Other House committee chairs show no signs of dropping their investigations of Trump. House Oversight Committee Chairwoman Carolyn Maloney told the Washington Examiner to “stay tuned.”

“We're going to continue all our investigations. We have two cases that are moving through the courts to the Supreme Court," she said. "One of the major cases is his financial records and the second one on the documentation of how they made their decisions on the citizenship question that was added, which was then removed by the Supreme Court. We're having hearings this week on four areas where they're rolling back protections on children. And next week, we have the census director coming in.”

Nadler says he is unconcerned about criticism that Democrats are obsessed with Trump investigations despite the president's pending acquittal and rising poll numbers.

“We always knew he was going to be acquitted by the Senate because we always knew that if the Republicans didn't care about the evidence or anything else, they proved it by not being willing to see the witnesses, we knew that in advance," Nadler said. "There were some people who said we shouldn't impeach the president because of his given approval and expected acquittal by the Senate, no matter what the facts, that would help him politically.”