During an appearance on MSNBC Monday night, Democratic Rep. Adam Schiff argued that Wuhan coronavirus victims are in a sense victims of the failed impeachment of President Trump, which on some days is “equivalent of the number of people we lost on 9/11.”

“We can’t act even slightly surprised by this because you told us this was going to happen in your argument in the Senate impeachment trial,” anchor Lawrence O’Donnell told the House Intelligence Committee chairman.

“Well, we certainly told the senators that he was not going to change, and there was no way to constrain him,” Schiff replied. “That he is who he is, and he would continue to operate the way he had, and indeed, that’s exactly what we’ve seen since. The one thing we dramatically understated is when we asked the question, ‘If you found him guilty, do you really need to remove him given there is another election only nine months away, how much damage could he really do?’”

He continued, “We said a lot, but little did we know just how great the casualties would be. Some days we lose the equivalent of the number of people we lost on 9/11. You know, I think that there is no way we could have foreseen just how tragic his malfeasance would be in his remaining months in the administration.”

Republicans panned Schiff’s argument as completely “unhinged.”

UNHINGED: Democrat Rep. Adam Schiff claims the casualties of coronavirus are casualties of the failed impeachment, implies the failed impeachment was worse than 9/11 pic.twitter.com/GtSiaSlLxv — Steve Guest (@SteveGuest) May 5, 2020

The reason the entire world is in the midst of a pandemic that’s not only killed more than 200,000 worldwide, but has also devastated economies and peoples’ livelihoods is because China lied about the virus from the beginning and suppressed physician whistleblowers who tried to speak out.

Fox News's Sean Hannity reminded viewers in March that perhaps if Democrats had been less focused on distracting the country with impeachment and more in tune with actual threats, more could've been done to protect and warn Americans about coronavirus.

"January 21, the very first person with coronavirus arrived in the U.S. from China. That's not long ago. The same time, Democrats, what were they doing? They were in the throes of an all-consuming, what has been the culmination of a three-year quest to impeach and throw Donald Trump out of office, undo an election that they never accepted the results of in the beginning," Hannity said on his March 16 program. "January 23, House impeachment managers, what were they doing? Oh, they were doing their opening arguments and impeachment. Same day, China completely sealed off the entire province of Wuhan. Then on January 31, look at this. The president then declared that national health emergency, ordered mandatory two-week quarantines. He issued the travel ban on all travel to and from China. And on that same day, what were the Democrats doing? They were busy with impeaching the president. They weren't caring. January 31, Senate Democrats desperately pushing for more impeachment witnesses, the day that Donald Trump put the travel ban quarantine in effect. Wow. It wasn't until February 5 that the impeachment charade was officially over and even then, many were plotting future impeachment investigations."

Editor's Note: Want to support Townhall so we can keep telling the truth about China and the virus they unleashed on the world? Join Townhall VIP and use the promo code WUHAN to get 25% off VIP membership!