U.S. markets plunged Thursday in the worst sell-off in three months as investors grow increasingly concerned about a rise in coronavirus cases and the future of the economy.

READ Federal Reserve Paints Grim Economic Outlook ]

The Dow Jones Industrial Average closed down nearly 1,861.81 points, or 6.9%. The S&P 500 slid 5.9% Thursday and the Nasdaq fell 5.3%. It's the biggest decline for the three major averages since March 16, when they all fell more than 11% as it became obvious that the coronavirus would have dramatic effects on everyday life.

Markets have surged in recent weeks even in the face of dire economic markers as investors optimistically eyed phased economic reopenings nationwide. All 50 states had begun reopening nonessential businesses by the end of last month and stay-at-home orders across the country began to be lifted.

But daily coronavirus cases have risen once again in a number of places including Florida, Texas and California, stoking fears of a second wave of the virus that experts warned against when certain states first began to reopen in April. A second wave of the virus could prompt the reimplementation of certain restrictions and cause a general dampening on consumer spending.

Political Cartoons on the Economy View All 297 Images

The Federal Reserve on Wednesday released a grim economic outlook , projecting a long and slow economic recovery. Officials at the central bank expect unemployment to be at 9.3% at the end of the year, and decline gradually to 5.5% in 2020. The Fed also projects that gross domestic product will drop 6.5% this year compared to last.

Traders dumped airlines, cruise operators and retailers Thursday. Banks suffered, and shares of manufacturing businesses also fell.

"The market was ripe for some profit-taking after soaring more than 40 percent since the March lows. Add in the reality of a long way to go in the economic recovery and the ever-present worries about a resurgence in the virus and you have the recipe for a sell-off," Greg McBride, chief financial officer at Bankrate, said in a statement.