WHY THIS QUESTION MATTERS:

In the midst of COVID-19 updates and adjusting to a new normal, it would have been easy to miss a significant update in the U.S. Women’s National Soccer Team (USWNT) lawsuit that occurred earlier this month.

As a reminder, the team filed a gender-discrimination lawsuit against the U.S. Soccer Federation in March 2019. The suit gained international attention when the team claimed another dominant victory in the 2019 Women’s World Cup. The crowd chanted “Equal Pay!” as the U.S. team celebrated their 4th World Cup victory on July 7th, 2019.



On May 1st, 2020 a federal judge rejected the women’s team’s argument against receiving lower pay than the U.S. men’s team. Is the USWNT experiencing gender-based pay discrimination? We’ll walk through the research behind both sides' arguments.





BACKGROUND:

Tension between the USWNT and the Federation is longstanding.

In 1999, the Federation took a financial risk to increase the scale of the Women's World Cup despite a lack of action from FIFA. However, the relationship between the two parties has remained strained. In the latest lawsuit, the USWNT alleges that the federation engages in “institutionalized gender discrimination.”

Here’s a quick timeline of the current lawsuit according to reporting by ESPN:

March 2019: The lawsuit was filed in U.S. District Court for the Central District of California under the Equal Pay Act and Title VII of the Civil Rights Act.



July 2019: USSF president Carlos Cordeiro released an open letter, citing what he described as extensive analysis of 10 years of financial data. He said the data showed that from 2010 to 2018, the women's players were paid $34.1 million in salary and game bonuses by U.S. Soccer, compared to $26.4 million given to the men during the same time period. The men's and women's teams operate with separate collective bargaining agreements and pay structures.



Nov 2019: federal judge R. Gary Klausner of the U.S. District Court for the Central District of California granted the USWNT's motion to give its lawsuit class certification. The early win for the women meant the lawsuit could include players who appeared for the national team dating back to Feb. 4, 2015. U.S. Soccer had opposed the motion for certification.



Feb 2020: In February, the two sides filed very different motions in district court. Lawyers for the USWNT filed for partial summary judgment seeking back pay of at least $66.7 million in addition to punitive damages. USSF asked the court to dismiss the lawsuit "based on the actual facts in the record and the governing law."



March 2020: he federation reversed course on the most contentious of its arguments. Cordeiro resigned on March 12 amid backlash from fans and sponsors to language in court filings attempting to show women's players did not perform work of equal skill, effort and responsibility. Both Cordeiro and new USSF president Cindy Parlow Cone apologized for the language widely viewed as demeaning women's players and women's sports generally.



May 2020: The trial was originally slated to begin on May 5 but was pushed back to June 16 after both sides sought guidance from the court in light of the coronavirus outbreak. California Gov. Gavin Newsom has issued a stay-at-home order in his state because of the global pandemic. U.S. Soccer publicly apologized for and legally walked back its most hard-line arguments. Indeed, it earned a fairly resounding win on the motion for summary judgment by focusing not on the idea that the women's players didn't perform equal work but that the differences in CBAs did not constitute discrimination but fair trade-offs willingly negotiated.

So where does that leave us? Let’s take a look at both sides of the argument.

THE COMMON THREAD:

Athletes should receive fair compensation for their performance.

FIND YOUR THREAD:

Supporters of the lawsuit say the women's team has actually been paid more than the men's team in the last decade when analyzing total compensation and tournament payouts are dictated by viewership and popularity. Opponents say the women's team has actually been paid more than the men's team in the last decade when analyzing total compensation and tournament payouts are dictated by viewership and popularity.

What do you think?