“The 360” shows you diverse perspectives on the day’s top stories and debates.

What’s happening

Less than a year ago, the Democratic presidential field featured a record number of female candidates, many of them with credentials as strong as any of the men in the race. As the primary carried on, however, the women in the contest gradually fell off one by one.

Elizabeth Warren, the last woman with a realistic shot at winning, dropped out last week after a poor showing on Super Tuesday. Her withdrawal ended the chance that the first woman president would be elected in 2020. Rep. Tulsi Gabbard is still in the running but trails Joe Biden and Bernie Sanders by more than 500 delegates.

Women have been running for the presidency since 1872, when Victoria Woodhull launched an ill-fated challenge to incumbent Ulysses S. Grant. Female candidates became increasingly competitive in recent decades, culminating in Hillary Clinton’s narrow loss to Donald Trump in 2016. More than 50 countries around the world have had a female leader.

Why there’s debate

The narrowing of the Democratic field to two male competitors, four years after Clinton’s surprise defeat, has led to discussion about the barriers that prevent women from winning the presidency.

Overt sexism certainly exists — globally women are seen as inferior political leaders — but experts say a subtler form of sexism is more widespread and damaging in the U.S. This sexism arises in the standards that female candidates are held to, which some argue are higher than those placed on their male competitors. Women also face disproportionate pressure to be “likable,” a burden that can create a difficult balancing act between projecting competence and not coming off as too severe. Research also suggests that women are seen as less electable than men, a handicap that’s even more pronounced in a year when beating Trump is the top priority for Democratic voters.

Discussing these issues can itself be a hurdle for female candidates. “If you say, ‘Yeah — there was sexism in this race,’ everyone says, ‘Whiner.’ And if you say, ‘No, there was no sexism,’ about a bazillion women think, ‘What planet do you live on?’” Warren said.

Some pundits make the counterargument that the impact of sexism is overstated and can sometimes be used as an excuse to cover up the more tangible shortcomings of failed campaigns. Others say disappointment at the presidential level shouldn’t overshadow the many victories women have claimed in congressional and state elections.

What’s next

Many prominent Democrats have called for Biden and Sanders to commit to naming a woman as their running mate for the general election. A female vice president would be a first for America, if Democrats take the White House in November.

Perspectives

America’s system of direct elections makes it harder for women

“The parliamentary system allows parties to be more intentional about advancing women leaders. … Under a parliamentary system, the head of state is not decided by whether a particular group of voters — say, white working-class voters in Michigan — identify with a particular candidate. If the U.S. had a parliamentary system, then Nancy Pelosi might be president of the United States.” — Charlotte Alter, Time

Denying that sexism is a problem makes it more difficult to combat

“You can’t meaningfully address a problem like gender bias that half of the population refuses to acknowledge even exists.” — Tessa Stuart, Rolling Stone

The issue goes deeper than overt sexism

“The problem goes beyond voters who hold traditional views of gender roles or admit that they wouldn’t be comfortable with a Madam President. More subtly, ambitious women are viewed more negatively than men, while women leaders are often considered less legitimate than men, in the United States, at least.” — Michelle Cottle, New York Times

America is ready for a woman president but hasn’t been presented with the right candidate

“If there is one thing Americans are prepared to do is vote for a female president. … I have no doubt about it. You find the right person with the right set of ideas and leadership style, it’s over — it becomes an advantage.” — Pete Hegseth, Fox News

The burden of potentially being the first woman president hinders candidates