Julie Mastrine

Opinion contributor

The other day a friend and I discussed the protests and riots in America in response to the killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis. He’s on the left and hears more about protests; I’m on the right and hear more about riots. We have very different views about the current situation in America, from what has caused it to what should be done. And social media filter bubbles fuel our respective beliefs.

To make his point about the dangers of authoritarianism, my friend sent me a video of police corralling protesters with tear gas.

To make my point that sometimes force is necessary to keep order, I sent a number of videos in return — including one of a cop being run over.

My friend condemned the violence and said, “I am glad we are sharing slices of each other's bubbles. Because I would not be following this guy you just shared.”

His comment underscored something AllSides has pointed out for a long time: Americans view the news — and now, videos about protests and riots — in partisan online filter bubbles.

It's more crucial than ever to understand this as America falls apart. When online technology and partisan media are designed to feed us perspectives, people and information that confirm what we already think, they fuel contempt and divide us.

Are you a radical type who thinks “all cops are bastards” (“ACAB,” as you may have seen spray painted in photos of vandalism in U.S. cities)? Or someone who thinks police are out of control? You’ll find plenty of content to confirm those beliefs: Police deploying tear gas and flash grenades; cops firing projectiles after ordering peaceful citizens to get inside their homes.

Maybe you think the majority of cops are good servants of their community. In that case, you may have seen or shared images of cops taking a knee, a police officer gently consoling a crying protester, a white officer helping a wounded African American woman.

Learn to listen to others' views

It’s OK to have a perspective. I have my own biases about what is going on. Perhaps you adamantly believe just one of these narratives, or perhaps you see truth in all of them. The danger is when we refuse to acknowledge or see other perspectives at all, when we do not allow information to break through the hardened shells of our ideology, when nuanced thinking is inhibited.

I fell victim to that in college. Reading inside a filter bubble caused me to adopt radical political views. I was upset about student debt, and fell down a rabbit hole of thought that blamed an entire system that I felt treated my family and others unfairly. The state, capitalism, the police — I saw it all as evil and unjust. For the good of all, I thought, the entire system must be destroyed.

But a voice inside me wondered what other people thought about these issues, what perspectives I was missing. Despite my deeply held beliefs, something told me I didn’t have the full picture.

I started to force myself to read media outside of my bubble, to listen to commentators on the other side. I realized they weren’t all evil, heartless and cruel. They were actually constructing morality based on a wider range of foundational values than I was, and they made a lot of good points I hadn’t considered.

Beliefs changed over time

I changed my views. Western civilization, I decided, has many problems and needs many changes, but was largely built on good, not evil. Our society is definitely not worth tearing down and replacing with some utopian ideal.

Getting out of my filter bubble meant the difference between becoming someone who, eight years later, could have a respectful conversation with my friend or becoming someone who could dupe myself into thinking we were doing good by burning a police cruiser. (I never thought violence was OK).

The point is, I am glad I exited that rabbit hole of thought before it led to further radicalization.

My friend said of one commentator whose tweets I had shared with him: “His timeline seems so biased to me. I will try to take my filter glasses off, though.”

Let's hope we all can.

Julie Mastrine is director of marketing at AllSides, which provides balanced news, media bias ratings and opportunities for civil discourse.