“The 360” shows you diverse perspectives on the day’s top stories and debates.

What’s happening

There’s no question that the wave of protests against police violence and racial injustice across the country has had a tremendous impact. For weeks, the country’s attention has been locked on a nationwide movement at a scale not seen since the 1960s.

Like the protests today, the civil rights movement forced many Americans to confront their attitudes toward race in a new and revealing way. But the success of that era wasn’t just psychological. The 1960s were also a period of tremendous systemic change that enshrined principles like voting rights, fair housing and antidiscrimination into law.

The current movement may feel like it has built that same sort of transformative energy in the weeks after it was sparked by the police killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis. But it’s too early to tell whether it will have the sustained support needed to create lasting change.

Why there’s debate

“It’s different this time” has been a frequent sentiment among historians, activists and other experts. While modern U.S. history has no shortage of social movements, today’s effort seems more focused and universal, they argue. The past few weeks have seen a remarkable shift in public opinion on issues related to racial justice. In 2016, 27 percent of Americans supported Black Lives Matter. Today, 57 percent do. In 1963, Martin Luther King Jr. expressed disappointment in the lack of support for civil rights from white moderate voters, who he called the “great stumbling block” in the “stride toward freedom.” Modern activists have expressed hope that opinions among white Americans have shifted enough to tip the scales.

Another reason for optimism among activists is the broad recognition that the entire system of law enforcement needs to be fixed, instead of just focusing on accountability for one police officer. An emphasis on specific policy proposals, rather than abstract sentiments, gives the movement a chance to achieve major legislative victories, they argue.

Others have expressed skepticism that the movement will achieve its goals. The power structures that have stifled previous efforts or limited their impact still exist, they contend. While it’s easy to build support for the idea that police shouldn’t be allowed to kill people with impunity, it can be much more difficult to maintain that consensus when the focus shifts from awareness to action. The intense partisan divide in America means that everything eventually becomes a fight between Democrats and Republicans — and attempts to enact laws around social justice aren’t likely to be an exception, some political experts argue.

There are also questions about whether the current level of enthusiasm can be sustained in the coming months and years if protesters are no longer in the streets. Some activists worry that many Americans, particularly white Americans, may feel like the goal has been accomplished after minor changes to police procedures are enacted or symbolic victories, like the toppling of Confederate statues, have been won.

Perspectives

Optimists

It’s not just a black movement anymore

“The long history of black folks in this country is conflict and struggle, between ourselves and the state and other interests within the society so that we can live free. And this is the first time that I think a lot of us have felt that the battle was legitimately joined, not just by white people but other people of color.” — Author Ta-Nehisi Coates to Vox

Political winds are shifting in the direction of change

“The evidence of police brutality has become too widespread even for elected officials to ignore. They can no longer easily coddle police unions in exchange for political support; now ignoring police misconduct will become a political liability, and perhaps something will change.” — Farhad Manjoo, New York Times

The current moment feels like the start of something larger

“Although it’s too soon to say what will be the result of the protests, there’s very little question that this is only the beginning. When anxiety meets moral outrage traveling at the speed of social media, an increasingly concerned and available populace becomes the match on the powder keg of America’s social tensions.” — Dana R. Fisher, Business Insider