North Carolina Gov. Pat McCrory declared a state of emergency in Charlotte on Wednesday night after violent new protests over the police shooting of a black man erupted in the heart of downtown, leaving one man shot and critically wounded.

The shooting Wednesday night occurred as protesters waded into the streets and began streaming toward downtown hotels while police in riot gear fired tear gas and attempted to block their progress.

The governor announced he has initiated efforts to deploy the National Guard and state troopers to help quell the violence, which has raged for the last two nights in Charlotte in response to the death of 43-year-old Keith Lamont Scott.

The unidentified victim during Wednesday night’s protests is a civilian who was shot by another civilian, the city said on its Twitter account.

Advertisement

City officials initially said the man was dead, but later corrected that to say he was in critical condition, on life support.

McCrory said he was ordering state assistance in response to a request from Charlotte-Mecklenburg Police Chief Kerr Putney.

“Any violence directed toward our citizens or police officers or destruction of property should not be tolerated,” the governor said in a statement. “I support and commend the law enforcement officials for their bravery and courage during this difficult situation.”

Advertisement

Mayor Jennifer Roberts appealed for protesters to go home and pledged that the city would conduct a thorough and transparent investigation.

“We are working very hard to bring peace and calm back to our city. We know that this is not who Charlotte is. This is not who we are,” she told CNN.

“Violence is not the answer,” she said.

In addition to the man who was seriously hurt, five law enforcement officers and eight other people were injured during Wednesday night’s events. Their injuries were not life-threatening, according to police.

Advertisement

1 / 37 A man stands in front of a line of police officers on a roadway in Charlotte, N.C., Tuesday night during a protest that broke out after police shot and killed Keith Lamont Scott, 43, in the parking lot of a condominium complex. Protests continued for days. (Jeff Siner / Charlotte Observer) 2 / 37 A protester uses milk to wash tear gas from her eyes after police used the gas to clear demonstrators who were blocking Interstate 277 in Charlotte, N.C., on Thursday. (Dillon Deaton / For The Times) 3 / 37 Protesters raise their hands as they march through downtown Charlotte, N.C., to protest the fatal police shooting of Keith Lamont Scott. (Dillon Deaton / For The Times) 4 / 37 Police say they found this gun holster on Keith Lamont Scott in Charlotte, N.C. (Charlotte Police Department) 5 / 37 A handgun that police say was in Keith Lamont Scott’s possession. (Charlotte Police Department) 6 / 37 A marijuana blunt police said they recovered after fatally shooting Keith Lamont Scott in Charlotte, N.C. Police said officers became suspicious of Scott after they saw him rolling the blunt in his car and then saw him “hold a gun up.” (Charlotte Police Department) 7 / 37 Police use pepper spray and tear gas to force protesters off Interstate 277 on Thursday. (Dillon Deaton / For The Times) 8 / 37 A protester kneels after police used tear gas to clear demonstrators on the Interstate in Charlotte. (Dillon Deaton / For The Times) 9 / 37 Protesters gather outside a government building in downtown Charlotte on Thursday. (Dillon Deaton / For The Times) 10 / 37 A protester with a biblical message. (Sean Rayford / Getty Images) 11 / 37 As curfew in Charlotte approached Thursday night, demonstrators voiced their views loudly. (Sean Rayford / Getty Images) 12 / 37 Police Capt. Mike Campagna talks with a demonstrator. (Sean Rayford / Getty Images) 13 / 37 Demonstrators march in Charlotte on Thursday. (Sean Rayford / Getty Images) 14 / 37 Members of the North Carolina National Guard stand guard outside the Omni Hotel in downtown Charlotte on Thursday. (Gerry Broome / Associated Press) 15 / 37 Police stand at the ready in Charlotte on Thursday. (Jeff Siner / Charlotte Observer) 16 / 37 Candles surround the spot where a protester was fatally shot in Charlotte, N.C. (Veasey Conway / European Pressphoto Agency) 17 / 37 Charlotte-Mecklenburg Police Chief Kerr Putney speaks during a news conference at department headquarters on Thursday. (John D. Simmons / Charlotte Observer) 18 / 37 Police and protesters carry a seriously wounded person into the parking area of the Omni Hotel in downtown Charlotte on Wednesday. (Brian Blanco / Getty Images) 19 / 37 A protester faces off with riot police on Wednesday. (Brian Blanco / Getty Images) 20 / 37 A policeman and a protester face to face. (Nicholas Kamm / AFP/Getty Images) 21 / 37 A protester in downtown Charlotte. (Nicholas Kamm / AFP/Getty Images) 22 / 37 Police fire tear gas as protesters converge in downtown Charlotte, N.C., the day after the police shooting of Keith Lamont Scott. (Gerry Broome / Associated Press) 23 / 37 Demonstrators take to the streets Wednesday to protest the fatal police shooting of Keith Lamont Scott in Charlotte, N.C. (Chuck Burton / Associated Press) 24 / 37 A protester sits near a pool of blood after a man was shot during a demonstration over the fatal police shooting of Keith Lamont Scott in Charlotte, N.C. The man, Justin Carr, later died at a local hospital, and police said they arrested and charged a man with with the shooting. (Chuck Burton / Associated Press) 25 / 37 Demonstrators protest the fatal police shooting of Keith Lamont Scott in Charlotte, N.C. (Chuck Burton / Associated Press) 26 / 37 Police fire tear gas at protesters in downtown Charlotte, N.C., the day after the fatal shooting of Keith Lamont Scott. (Gerry Broome / Associated Press) 27 / 37 Protesters throw chairs at a restaurant during a demonstration against the use of deadly force by police in Charlotte, N.C. (Nicholas Kamm / AFP/Getty Images) 28 / 37 Protesters march to demonstrate agasint the fatal police shooting of Keith Scott in Charlotte, N.C. (Brian Blanco / Getty Images) 29 / 37 Police face off with protestors on Interstate 85 in Charlotte, N.C., during demonstrations after a man was shot to death by police. (Sean Rayford / Getty Images) 30 / 37 Protesters clash with police in Charlotte, N.C., in an overnight demonstration that broke out after Keith Lamont Scott was fatally shot by an officer. (Jeff Siner / Charlotte Observer) 31 / 37 A protestor kicks a tear gas canister fired by police in Charlotte, N.C. (Jeff Siner / Charlotte Observer) 32 / 37 Protestors surround a police vehicle in Charlotte, N.C. (Jeff Siner / Charlotte Observer) 33 / 37 Protestors march down a street in the early hours of Wednesday. The protests began after 43-year-old Keith Lamont Scott was shot and killed by police in northeast Charlotte, N.C. (Sean Rayford / Getty Images) 34 / 37 A police officer in riot gear walks past a fire on Interstate 85 in Charlotte, N.C. (Sean Rayford / Getty Images) 35 / 37 A protestor walks alongside police officers in Charlotte. (Jeff Siner / Charlotte Observer) 36 / 37 Police officers stand in a haze of tear gas on Old Concord Road in Charlotte, N.C., on Tuesday night. Protests broke out after police shot and killed Keith Lamont Scott in the parking lot of the Village at College Downs condominium complex Tuesday afternoon. (Jeff Siner / Charlotte Observer) 37 / 37 Protestors hold up their arms in the air in front of a police line early Wednesday morning in Charlotte. (Jeff Siner / The Charlotte Observer)

Protests began quietly downtown on Wednesday afternoon, with chants of “Black lives matter!” and “No justice, no peace!”

But they suddenly escalated as demonstrators moved into a central commercial zone flanked by expensive hotels and the Spectrum Center sports arena.

Windows were smashed at the NASCAR Hall of Fame, a Buffalo Wild Wings restaurant, the Charlotte Observer newspaper offices and the Westin Hotel.

Advertisement

Crowds quickly grew near the Omni hotel, and police in riot gear surrounded the increasingly agitated protesters, who began knocking over pots and plants at the hotel driveway. Then the protesters tried to storm the hotel.

Police fired tear gas and nonlethal grenades to quell the crowds. Blood splattered on the street after the man was struck by gunshots.

Both the Ritz-Carlton and Omni shut down, with Ritz-Carlton employees barricading themselves inside with furniture blocking the entrance. At the Omni, where a streak of what looked like blood could be seen on a lobby entrance window, staffers let police in to make arrests and question protesters.

Police said officers did not fire shots. Through much of the evening, they were ordering protesters to back off, shouting: “Lives are in danger!”

Advertisement

A protester stares at a riot police officer in downtown Charlotte. (Nicholas Kamm/AFG/Getty Images )

But protesters continued to throw bottles and shout. Looters ransacked and broke windows at the Charlotte Hornets store at Spectrum Center, a block away from the site of Wednesday night’s shooting.

By 11 p.m., dozens of demonstrators remained near the shooting scene, not far from the Omni, as police continued to confront protesters, detaining a few.

One demonstrator hoisted a sign saying, “End State-Sanctioned Murder.” On a street corner, a young couple snapped selfies, while a man repeatedly shouted, “Jesus saves!” Nonlethal grenades could be heard on occasion in the background.

Advertisement

A small fire was lighted near a set of streetcar tracks but was quickly put out.

“Last 24 hours of violent protest worst I have ever seen in Charlotte,” tweeted state Rep. Kelly Alexander Jr. (D-Mecklenburg), who urged authorities to release police dashboard-camera video of Scott’s shooting “ASAP.”

Scott was confronted Tuesday by police outside a Charlotte condominium complex where officers had gone to serve an arrest warrant on another person.

Police say Scott emerged from his vehicle with a gun and refused orders to drop it; Scott’s family members contend that he was not armed, and was holding a book.

Advertisement

In a statement Wednesday, Scott’s wife, Rakeyia, said she has more “questions than answers” about the shooting after hearing police statements, and she called for peace.

“We respect the rights of those who wish to protest, but we ask that people protest peacefully. Please do not hurt people or members of law enforcement, damage property or take things that do not belong to you in the name of protesting,” the statement said.

Advertisement

jaweed.kaleem@latimes.com

Jaweed Kaleem is The Times’ national race and justice correspondent. Follow him onTwitter, Facebook and Instagram.

ALSO

Advertisement

Charlotte’s racial divisions deepen over police shooting

Anger grows in Tulsa as police release video of fatal shooting of unarmed black man

$1.9-million settlement in Sandra Bland death is the latest big payout in police-misconduct lawsuits

UPDATES:

Advertisement

Sept. 22, 8:10 a.m.: This story was updated with the latest number of people injured.

Sept. 21, 10:05 p.m.: The story was updated to clarify the number of police officers injured and add details of property damage.

8:20 p.m.: The story was updated with the governor’s declaration of a state of emergency and decision to deploy the National Guard.

8:10 p.m.: The story was updated with additional details of the protests and a statement from the governor.

Advertisement

7:45 p.m.: The story was updated with the city’s clarification that the person shot during the protests was critically injured, but not dead.

This story was originally published at 6:30 p.m.