Minnesota Democrat Attorney General Keith Ellison suggested on Thursday that supporters of socialist Senator Bernie Sanders (I-VT), who are often referred to as “Bernie bros,” are not mean or rude to other people despite numerous reports showing the opposite.

Ellison, who is a supporter of Sanders, wrote on Twitter, “I have never seen @BernieSanders supporters being unusually mean or rude. Can someone send me an example of a ‘Bernie Bro’ being bad? Also, are we holding all candidates responsible for the behavior of some of their supporters? Waiting to hear.”

House Minority Whip Steve Scalise, a Republican from Louisiana, quickly responded to Ellison, writing, “I can think of an example.”

I can think of an example. https://t.co/KwuvyYgyGw — Steve Scalise (@SteveScalise) February 20, 2020

Scalise was referencing the Democrat terrorist, who was a supporter of Sanders, who shot up a baseball field full of Republican lawmakers in June 2017.

Scalise was seriously wounded in the politically motivated terrorist attack and spent six weeks in a hospital fighting for his life.

Sen. Rand Paul (R-KY), who was at the Virginia baseball field during the terrorist attack, later mentioned that the Democrat terrorist was screaming, “this is for health care!” as he shot at lawmakers.

“I was there at the ball field when Steven Scalise almost died from a very, very angry violent man who was incited really by rhetoric on the left,” Paul said. “And this hasn’t been reported enough, when he came on the field with a semi-automatic weapon firing probably close to 200 shots at us, shooting five people and almost killing Steve Scalise, he was yelling ‘this is for healthcare!’ He also had a list of conservative legislators, Republicans, in his pocket that he was willing to kill.”

“So what happens is that when Democrats say ‘get up in their face,’ they need to realize that there are a lot of unstable people out there,” Paul continued. “There are people with anger issues, there are people who are prone to violence.”

Ellison’s suggestion that Sanders’ supporters are not “mean” or “rude” also ignores the explosive videos that were released by James O’Keefe’s Project Veritas earlier this year that showed paid Sanders staff allegedly talking about wanting to kill or harm political opponents.

In South Carolina, Project Veritas provided the following highlights of things that Sanders’ campaign field organizer Mason Baird allegedly said:

“A lot of the stories we’re told in the United States about, you know, the gulags and the persecution of the Kulaks and things like that are exaggerated … we certainly don’t have, uh, a straight perspective on that stuff here in America.”

“We would need a federal government and a labor movement that is working together to strip power away from capitalists and preferably directing that violence towards property.”

“It would, it’s gonna take, you know, it’s gonna take militancy … like a militant labor movement that’s willing to … strike, and if necessary, you know, just destroy property and things like that.”

“… after we abolish landlords, we don’t have to kill them …”

In South Carolina, Project Veritas provided the following highlights of things that Sanders’ campaign field organizer Daniel Taylor allegedly said:

“We don’t want to scare people off, you first have to feel it out before you get into the crazy stuff … You know we were talking about more extreme organizations like Antifa, you were talking about, Yellow Vests, all that but we’re kinda keeping that on the back-burner for now.”

“We have all this momentum, where do we go, regardless of the outcome, after it’s all over? Change won’t come easily, regardless. Even if Bernie is elected, change will not come swiftly or easily, so the connections we make now in the campaign with people, and volunteers, it’s important we retain that regardless of the outcome. It’s unfortunate that we have to make plans for extreme action but like I said, they’re not going to give it to us even if Bernie is elected.”

In South Carolina, Project Veritas provided the following highlights of things that Sanders’ campaign field organizer Martin Weissgerber allegedly said: