Rep. Jim Banks (R-Ind.) introduced a bill Tuesday aimed at barring the United States from sharing intelligence with any countries that permit Huawei to operate their 5G networks.

“Huawei is a Trojan Horse for the Chinese Communist Party to spy on and infiltrate other nations. Our allies must choose: Adopt Huawei and lose access to U.S. intelligence, or remain our trusted partner,” Banks said in a statement.

The legislation comes after the Department of Commerce placed the Chinese telecommunications giant on its blacklist last spring, preventing U.S. firms from working with Huawei without first obtaining a permit.

ADVERTISEMENT

Proponents of the new bill — which include Rep. Liz Cheney Elizabeth (Liz) Lynn CheneyHouse GOP leaders condemn candidate who said black people should be 'proud' of Confederate statues Overnight Defense: Senate confirms US military's first African American service chief | Navy to ban display of Confederate flags | GOP lawmakers urge Trump not to cut troops in Germany Republicans urge Trump to reject slashing US troop presence in Germany MORE (R-Wyo.) — argue that it's a necessary step to prevent the Chinese government from spying on the country, saying the company poses a risk to U.S. national security.

Cheney, a member of the House Armed Services Committee, also called on the United Kingdom to refrain from doing business with the telecommunications company, arguing it could strain relations between Washington and London.

“Huawei is controlled by the Chinese Communist Party and its efforts to infiltrate 5G are nefarious at their core. Allowing Huawei into the U.K.’s 5G networks would pose a national security threat that could not be mitigated or contained. Such a decision would necessarily have negative consequences for the U.S./U.K. relationship in many areas, including trade and intelligence cooperation,” she said in a statement in support of the measure.

"I hope that the U.K. unites with the U.S. and other allies against the threat from Huawei," she added. "However, the U.S. must always be prepared to protect its national security interests.”

The United Kingdom is expected to announce whether it will use Huawei in its 5G networks in coming weeks.

Sen. Tom Cotton Tom Bryant CottonRoberts sparks backlash from conservative senators with DACA ruling Hillicon Valley: Senate Republicans, DOJ target Section 230 | Facial recognition under the spotlight | Zoom launches E2E encrypted beta Republicans, DOJ propose scaling back social media liability protections MORE (R-Ark.) recently introduced companion legislation in the Senate.