Three rockets reportedly hit the U.S. Embassy compound in Baghdad on Sunday, minorly injuring one person, a U.S. official told CNN.

A State Department spokesperson told The Hill on Sunday that they “are aware of reports of rockets landing in the International Zone” but did not mention the embassy or whether employees were injured.

“The security situation remains tense and Iranian-backed armed groups remain a threat. So, we remain vigilant," the spokesperson said, requesting the Iraqi government get involved to protect “diplomatic facilities.”

ADVERTISEMENT

Recent months have seen multiple attacks in Baghdad’s Green Zone, where the U.S. Embassy and other Western countries’ embassies are located. The State Department spokesperson said there have been 14 attacks on U.S. personnel in Iraq conducted by Iran and Iranian-backed militias.

Iraq has been caught in the middle of rising tensions between Iran and the U.S. in recent months. Protests erupted at the U.S. Embassy in Baghdad after the U.S. struck an Iranian-backed militia, which it says killed a U.S. contractor in an attack.

The U.S. also killed Iranian Gen. Qassem Soleimani in a strike at the Baghdad airport, prompting Iran to promise retaliation and strike multiple Iraqi bases that housed U.S. troops. That attack resulted in the brain injuries of 34 service members, the Pentagon announced Friday.

The State Department spokesperson did not directly blame Sunday's strike on Iran, and Iran has not taken responsibility for the attack.

Rep. Michael McCaul Michael Thomas McCaulHillicon Valley: Facebook takes down Trump ads featuring symbol used by Nazis | Twitter, Facebook see new disinformation tactics | Republican calls out social media giants for not fighting Chinese propaganda The US must meaningfully confront Chinese Communist Party propaganda House Republican accuses Facebook, Twitter, YouTube of not doing enough to combat Chinese propaganda MORE (Texas), the ranking Republican on the House Foreign Affairs Committee, said in a tweet posted by the committee’s GOP account that he is “closely monitoring” the reports of the rocket attacks on the embassy.

“I am closely monitoring reports of a rocket attack targeting the U.S. Embassy in Baghdad. Violent acts against our diplomatic facilities are simply unacceptable. We must ensure the safety of American diplomats, troops and other Americans in Iraq.” -LR @RepMcCaul — House Foreign Affairs GOP (@HouseForeignGOP) January 26, 2020

Iraqi Prime Minister Adil Abdul Mahdi denounced the strike, saying Iraqi forces will investigate to stop future attacks and punish the perpetrators.