On Tuesday, Pruitt came under fresh fire when The Atlantic reported that he had gone to extraordinary lengths to get a raise for two his favorite aides—including one who helped him locate a cheap place to stay in Washington.

Pruitt asked that Greenwalt’s salary be raised from $107,435 to $164,200; Hupp’s, from $86,460 to $114,590. Because both women were political appointees, he needed the White House to sign-off on their new pay. … After the White House rejected their request, Pruitt’s team studied the particulars of the Safe Drinking Water provision, according to the source with direct knowledge of these events. By reappointing Greenwalt and Hupp under this authority, they learned, Pruitt could exercise total control over their contracts and grant the raises on his own. Pruitt ordered it done. Though Hupp and Greenwalt’s duties did not change, the agency began processing them for raises of $28,130 and $56,765, respectively, compared with their 2017 salaries. Less than two weeks after Pruitt had approached the White House, according to time-stamped Human Resources documents shared with The Atlantic, the paperwork was finished.

On Wednesday, Pruitt retreated to the friendly confines of Fox News, where he could be praised for his attempts to “implement Trump’s agenda” i.e. destroy the regulation of water, land and air. But even his Fox host had a hard time supporting Pruitt in his adoption of the Sgt. Schultz defense.

HENRY: If you’re committed to the Trump agenda, why did you go around the president and the White House to give pay raises to two staffers – PRUITT: I did not. My staff did, and I found out about that yesterday and I changed it. HENRY: So – PRUITT: PPPO process should have been respected, and I issued a statement yesterday walking back those pay raises that should have not been – HENRY: So, was anyone fired for that? PRUITT: … should not have been done. It made – HENRY: Who did it? PRUITT: There … there will be some accountability. HENRY: Career person or political person? PRUITT: I have to … I don’t know. I don’t know. HENRY: You don’t know? You don’t know who did this? PRUITT: I found out about this yesterday. And I corrected the action. We are in the process of finding out how it took place and – HENRY: So hang on. Both of these staffers who got these large pay raises are friends of yours. I believe from Oklahoma, correct? PRUITT: They are staffers here in the agency. HENRY: And they’re friends of yours. PRUITT; Well … well, they serve a very important person – HENRY: And you didn’t know that they got these large pay raises? PRUITT: I did not know that they got the pay raises until yesterday.

It goes on from there. At a bare minimum, Pruitt comes off as an idiot who doesn’t know what’s going on in his own department. But even a casual observer—even a Fox News watcher—certainly got the message that Pruitt was simply lying. The only question now is whether Pruitt will be allowed to throw staffers on the fire and shout “Deep State!” or whether he’ll be forced to own up to actions that could have only come from his office.

Meanwhile, one other factor that didn’t get any initial scrutiny on the condo front.

Before Environmental Protection Agency chief Scott Pruitt rented a room from a top DC energy lobbyist, that lobbyist and his wife funded Pruitt’s efforts to climb the political ladder in his home state of Oklahoma. Campaign finance records in the state show that Steven and Vicki Hart, the power couple who last year rented Pruitt a room in their Capitol Hill home for $50 per night, began donating to Pruitt’s campaigns for Oklahoma attorney general in 2010. Steven Hart even hosted a fundraiser for Pruitt’s reelection effort.

So Pruitt could essentially pay the token amount he was giving for their condo … with their own money.

Pruitt is in serious trouble. And though he probably wishes he could get away on a nice $120,000 taypayer funded vacation to Rome, it’s time to keep the pressure on.

If you haven’t called your member of Congress, call. If you have called, call again — (202) 224-3121.