Jonathan Starkey, Cris Barrish and Esteban Parra

The (Wilmington, Del.) News Journal

DOVER, Del. — Looking down over former Delaware attorney general Beau Biden's flag-draped casket in the Delaware Senate chambers Thursday, Gov. Jack Markell and other state leaders praised Vice President Biden's oldest son at an unprecedented memorial service.

"Beau made Delaware a better place for us all," Markell told a gathering that included Joe Biden's wife, Jill, Beau's widow Hallie, children Natalie and Hunter. Beau's brother, Hunter, and sister, Ashley. "The Biden family is Delaware's family. Know that we grieve with you."

Biden, who left office in January with his sights set on succeeding Markell in 2017, died Saturday after a nearly two-year fight against brain cancer. He was 46. After recovering from a minor stroke he suffered in 2010, he was diagnosed with cancer in August 2013, when he had a small lesion surgically removed from his brain at the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center in Houston.

During the solemn half-hour service in Dover's Legislative Hall, Markell and five other speakers spoke of Beau Biden's love for his family and Delawareans, and lauded his efforts in office to protect children from sexual predators, punish violent criminals and stop senior citizens from being defrauded.

"Because of what Beau Biden did in this very building, the children of Delaware are safer for generations to come," Markell said. "Delaware seniors are more secure, crime victims are more certain that the state stands behind them. Students are more confident that bullies will be held accountable.

"Beau made Delaware a better place for us all. And he did so because of his determination and his persistence, because of his intellect and his willingness to fight."

Markell also presented the Biden family with the Delaware Conspicuous Service Cross in honor of Beau, who served as a lawyer for the Delaware Army National Guard and spent one year in Iraq on active duty in 2008 and 2009.

Attorney General Matt Denn, the former lieutenant governor who succeeded Biden, said he made sure his two children, now 9 and 11, came first. "Natalie and Hunter knew how much he loved them," Denn said. "He was taken away from them too soon."

Delaware National Guard Maj. Gen. Francis D. Vavala, the adjutant general whom Biden served under in the Guard, said, "We knew him in so many ways dear Lord. Major Biden, Attorney General Bide, dad, son, brother, husband. And we all knew him as Beau."

Vavala called Biden a public servant, a personal friend, a champion for children and a person of deep faith and strong convictions and a person who touched more lives that can be counted.

"Beau was a good and decent human being," he said. "And between the bookends are the triumphs too many to number."

The Legislative Hall memorial is first of its kind. Delaware has no record of any such public mourning event in the capitol building since it opened in 1933.

Col. John Haslet, an officer in the Continental American Army during the American Revolution, was probably the last person to be laid in honor in the Old State House Building in Dover, said Russ McCabe, a Delaware historian and former state archivist.

People started gathering outside Legislative Hall shortly after 11 a.m., including media crews that lined the edge of The Green across the street. Delaware Capitol Police swept the building with police dogs as friends, legislators and former staff members of Biden's gathered outside.

Many government officials would not comment but others said the Legislative Hall tribute is fitting for Biden, who followed his father into politics after growing up in the public eye as the son of a politician with statewide popularity.

"I'm just happy we're able to pay tribute in this way," said Sen. Harris McDowell, Delaware's longest-serving lawmaker, choking up Thursday as he discussed Beau Biden.

Rita Landgraf, secretary of the state Department of Health and Social Services, teared up as she waited in line.

"It's stunning," said Landgraf, who added that she worked closely with Beau Biden on the prosecution of pedophile pediatrician Earl Bradley case and that his drive to get justice for the children hurt by Bradley was unprecedented.

"He went beyond his call of duty," Landgraf said, as state Department of Finance Secretary Tom Cook nodded in agreement.

The two had similar childhoods in Delaware's political spotlight, said Cook, the son of former Joint Finance Committee chairwoman Nancy Cook of the Dover area.

"It's so sad to think he's gone so young," Cook said. "You don't think it's true," he said.

At 12:50 p.m. in Washington, the U.S. House of Representatives unanimously passed Delaware congressman John Carney's resolution commemorating Biden's life.

"This weekend, Beau Biden left this world far too soon at the age of 46," Carney told fellow members of Congress. "My home state of Delaware, and this country, suffered a loss that is deeply painful, and deeply personal."

After getting diagnosed with brain cancer, Biden underwent a round of chemotherapy and radiation treatment, and in the vice president's office said he was given a clean bill of health by his doctor in November 2013. But Biden's cancer returned this spring, and he and immediately sought aggressive treatment. He was admitted into Walter Reed National Military Medical Center for treatment last month.

Biden served as attorney general, from 2007-2015. As Delaware's top law enforcement official, he stepped up prosecutions of child sex crimes, advocating for stricter gun control laws and anti-bullying measures. As his tenure neared its end, Biden said he would set his sights on a gubernatorial run.

"He's very well respected, a dedicated public official and was just well liked," said former House Speaker Robert Gilligan, a Democrat. "I think you're seeing an outpouring of emotion because of what he accomplished and also out of respect for the Biden family. It's such a terrible tragedy. He was always a gentleman."

Contributing: William H. McMichael and Robin Brown, The (Wilmington, Del.) News Journal.