When the C.I.A. first rolled out their conclusion last week that hackers from Russia did indeed influence the election, representatives from the F.B.I. weren’t so sure. There seemed to be a disconnect between the research from both agencies, and the Bureau wasn’t as convinced that whatever hacking that did occur had influenced Election Day in any way. Now, however, both agencies seem to be on the same page; C.I.A. Director John Brennan sent out a message on Friday saying that there is now a “strong consensus” from the two in regards to the hacking.

“Earlier this week, I met separately with F.B.I. [Director] James Comey and D.N.I. Jim Clapper, and there is strong consensus among us on the scope, nature, and intent of Russian interference in our presidential election,” Brennan said in the message, which was sent out to all employees of the agency Friday evening, according to The Washington Post.

In his last press conference of the year President Barack Obama said that the U.S. would likely take retaliatory measures against the Kremlin. Donald Trump has repeatedly said that he doesn’t agree with the C.I.A.’s assessment of the attacks, and that it’s time to “move on.” Hillary Clinton, meanwhile, said Thursday that Putin ordered the hacks that unearthed emails from her campaign because of a personal vendetta against her. The C.I.A. and F.B.I. are also in agreement that the hackers didn’t intervene with just one purpose in mind, though it is “quite clear” that one goal was to elect Trump. The overall intent? To undermine U.S. citizens’ confidence in the electoral system.

Apparently, the perceived disagreement between the two agencies about the hacking attempts was not a disagreement at all. The Post writes that when a senior F.B.I. official briefed the House Intelligence Committee about the C.I.A.’s findings, his more cautious take on the events led some to believe the two agencies were not in accord. Now, officials say that that wasn’t the case at all, and that “they were never all that different in the first place.”