From the Left

The left calls for a comprehensive plan for reopening the economy and is divided about the risks from protesting.

“New hot spots are emerging [in Arizona, Arkansas, Florida, North Carolina, South Carolina, Texas, and Utah]… Some of that spike is probably the result of more testing. But what’s so concerning is that the positive test rate is also increasing at the same time, up from less than 8 percent at the end of May to nearly 14 percent now… It is difficult to ignore that the places seeing surges in Covid-19 cases began to reopen businesses and other public spaces a few weeks ago…



“The nationwide protests over George Floyd’s death, police violence, and structural racism have also been met with concerns that they would become superspreading events… According to the experts I spoke with, however, it is simply too early to know whether the coronavirus will spread widely because of the protests. And it is worth remembering the differences between outdoor and indoor exposure, the latter being much more dangerous; it could end up being the case that people got infected because they were arrested and put into a police van or jail cell with other people, not because they were outside protesting in a big crowd.”

Dylan Scott, Vox

Some argue that “I’ve been a vocal supporter of these protests from their start… But what we should not tolerate, and what the scientific community cannot permit if it is to retain its credibility, is the abuse and manipulation of health expertise for political ends. One of two things is true; either 1) these protests will lead to a significant spike in coronavirus infections and deaths, in which case public health experts should reconcile that outcome with how they could have encouraged and endorsed them; or 2) it will not lead to such a spike, in which case it will appear that the months of extreme, draconian lockdowns — which caused great suffering and deprivation around the world — were excessive, misguided and unwarranted.”

Glenn Greenwald, The Intercept

Others note that “The people who are marching in the streets right now are well aware of the risk of coronavirus transmission… They are not acting out of ignorance that needs to be corrected by public-health experts. As one protester in Minneapolis said, ‘Yes, corona is happening. It’s real, it’s deadly. But racism kills way more lives’… Even if public-health experts did want to stop the protests, they almost certainly could not. Any public-health pronouncements to the hundreds of thousands of people marching around the U.S. and worldwide would be like shouting into a mighty wind…



“Many experts, and some public-health officials, have adopted a harm-reduction approach to the protests, accepting that they must happen and offering recommendations to help people protest as safely as possible. Others have gone further by handing out masks and other protective gear on-site… The decision reflects what public-health experts have always tried to do: maximize the health of the population across all aspects of life.”

Julia Marcus and Gregg Gonsalves, The Atlantic

“Experts never said that eternal lockdowns were the only choice we had to combat the pandemic. They argued that once areas got the initial case spikes under control through widespread social distancing (with new cases decreasing over at least a two-week span), a new phase of control should begin with widespread testing and contact tracing. The initial lockdown period avoided the worst possible scenario, but the US didn’t use that time to prepare for managing the pandemic in the future. And now we’ve wasted the weeks that have passed since reopening…



“‘We managed to disrupt our economy [and] skyrocket unemployment, and we didn’t control the damn virus,’ said Jeff Shaman, an infectious disease modeler at Columbia University.”

Brian Resnick, Vox