When President Obama ran for office in 2008, he promised he'd implement new policies that would force electricity rate to "necessarily" skyrocket.

Here we are six years later and President Obama is set to announce new, major regulations on power plants in the name of climate change. The New York Timesis calling it the boldest move ever made by a president to address the issue.

The Obama administration is set to announce a rule Monday to limit carbon emissions in thousands of fossil-fuel burning plants across the country, a cornerstone of President Obama’s climate-change agenda and his first-term promise to reduce such emissions by 17 percent by 2020.



The Environmental Protection Agency will ask existing plants to cut pollution by 30 percent by 2030, according to people familiar with the proposal who shared the details with The Associated Press on condition of anonymity, since they have not been officially released.



Over at HotAir, Erika Johnsen describes new regulations as "uncharted waters" for the EPA, which arguably under the Obama administration has already vastly expanded its authority, constitutional or not. Further, the EPA has set up the new regulations strategically in expectation they'll be sued.

Leave it to the Obama Environmental Protection Agency to plumb the heretofore untested depths of regulatory legerdemain to justify their environmentalist central planning.



The Obama administration’s forthcoming regulations on existing power plants — i.e., the main course of their proffered climate-change menu, set for release this week — were always going to spark a whole host of legal challenges no matter what provisions they used for their justification. The negative economic impact the new rules will have on a bunch of states and industries is certainly going to make it worth their while, and part of the EPA’s task in devising the rules was to find the best way possible to protect them from these challenges.

Lawmakers on Capitol Hill are already pushing back against the measure, calling Obama's EPA power move just another episode in the ongoing war on coal an blue-collar workers.

President Barack Obama has "set out to kill coal" with his plans for cutting carbon emissions regulations like his proposed national energy tax, Sen. Mike Enzi said Saturday.



"We all want clean air and clean water," Wyoming's Enzi said in this week's GOP address. "We don’t want costly regulations that make little or no difference, that are making things less affordable. Republicans want electricity and gas when you need it, at a price you can afford.”

Keep working America, you're going to need to in order to pay for your new electricity costs.