Help is on the way for the masses of people out of work and the businesses struggling to stay open in the coronavirus crisis — but many will still have to wait to apply for their benefits.

“The money has been authorized but the actual procedures have not come down yet for some of these programs,” U.S. Rep. Stephen Lynch said in a press call Wednesday.

Under the $2.2 trillion federal CARES Act, self-employed workers and contract employees will now be able to access unemployment benefits.

Small businesses will be able to apply for eight weeks of payroll assistance of up to $10 million through the Paycheck Protection Program, a $10,000 Economic Injury Disaster Loan advance or a full loan of up to $2 million.

“People should definitely log their claims so they can receive retroactive benefits,” said Michael Finer, CEO of Finer Wealth Management. “If you don’t log your claim, you may not receive benefits.”

People can apply for unemployment benefits through the state’s website, Mass.gov. Most claims are processed within 21 to 28 days, though Finer warned the system is currently overloaded and might take longer.

The CARES Act adds 13 weeks of benefits to the traditional 26 weeks, plus an extra $600 a week in federal benefits for up to four months.

Officials are asking those who are self-employed to wait to file until the state gets more guidance on how to process their claims.

“We are pushing the Department of Labor to get this technical information to the states as quickly as possible,” U.S. Rep. Katherine Clark said. “We anticipate they will have this within the next few days.”

Small businesses can apply for the Paycheck Protection Program through local banks starting Friday. Independent contractors and self-employed people can apply starting Tuesday.

John Geraci of LGA CPAs and Business Advisors said businesses will need to submit calendar year 2019 payroll reports and evidence of operating on Feb. 15, 2020. They should also check to make sure their bank is participating in the program.

“Assume this is first come, first serve,” Geraci said. “Do your best to be as timely in your position as possible … When in doubt, submit more information, not less.”

Business can apply for disaster loans through the Small Business Administration’s website.

Federal stimulus checks will be processed by the IRS based on 2019 or 2018 tax returns. Clark said she expects payments to begin by Monday, April 6.

Those earning less than $75,000 will receive $1,200. Married couples filing joint returns of less than $150,000 will receive $2,400. Parents also get $500 for each qualifying child. Seniors who do not typically file returns will need to submit a “simple tax return” to receive payment, the IRS said, though it has not yet set up the system.