President Trump reiterated Monday morning he is working closely with governors across the country to determine when to safely re-open the American economy.

For the purpose of creating conflict and confusion, some in the Fake News Media are saying that it is the Governors decision to open up the states, not that of the President of the United States & the Federal Government. Let it be fully understood that this is incorrect.... — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) April 13, 2020

....It is the decision of the President, and for many good reasons. With that being said, the Administration and I are working closely with the Governors, and this will continue. A decision by me, in conjunction with the Governors and input from others, will be made shortly! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) April 13, 2020

New York Governor Andrew Cuomo also weighed in.

We are in a situation that never has occurred before.



Reopening the economy is a delicate balance.



The objective is to ease isolation & increase economic activity without increasing the infection rate.



We must do it slowly & intelligently & with every precaution. — Andrew Cuomo (@NYGovCuomo) April 13, 2020

President Trump told reporters late last week a second Wuhan coronavirus council made up of doctors, economists and business people, will be announced Tuesday.

"We're setting up a council of very, very great doctors and business people. We're going to be announcing it on Tuesday. Some great people. This is beyond economic. I call it our Opening Our Country Task Force or Council," Trump said Friday afternoon. "We're going to have a great group of people."

"I want to get it open as soon as possible," he continued. "I would love to open it. I have not determined anything. The facts are going to determine what I do."

Trump says next Tuesday he will announce the members of an "Opening Our Country Council," which will touch on economic issues https://t.co/9T8aUPjUrs pic.twitter.com/lcHhfIKQEJ — CBS News (@CBSNews) April 10, 2020

The new council will hold meetings digitally and members will be from cities across the country.

Editor's Note: Want to support Townhall so we can keep telling the truth about China and the virus they unleashed on the world? Join Townhall VIP and use the promo code WUHAN to get 25% off VIP membership!