“The 360” shows you diverse perspectives on the day’s top stories and debates.

What’s happening

The coronavirus pandemic has led governments around the world to employ every possible resource to stem the spread of the virus. Those efforts can only go so far, however, before they come up against limitations.

One of the barriers is privacy. Some experts see opportunities to use technology to track and potentially control the outbreak, but doing so could mean breaking existing legal and social privacy restrictions.

One of the most effective tools could be location data from phones. The simplest proposed application is to use anonymous data to monitor the effectiveness of social distancing to see whether people are following protocols and identify which areas can be safely reopened. A more intensive idea is to track the recent movements of someone who has tested positive for the virus and alert anyone who came into contact with them that they may be at elevated risk. The U.S. government reportedly met with major tech companies about gaining access to their data. Some private firms are making their data public to help track the virus.

Some countries that have been most successful in curbing outbreaks — including South Korea and Singapore — have used aggressive technological surveillance to track and isolate infected people. China’s authoritarian regime used mandatory wristbands to monitor people under quarantine and required workers to download an app that tracked their health risk. Democracies like Israel and Italy have expanded data monitoring in response to the outbreak.

Why there’s debate

Advocates for softening privacy rules argue that the U.S. should be using every possible tool to combat the virus. In the face of the current crisis, legitimate privacy concerns must take a back seat to saving lives, they argue. Tech experts say systems used to track the virus could be built to ensure as much privacy as possible through rules requiring the data be anonymous, limiting how it can be used and setting a time frame for it to be deleted. If the government is transparent about data collection, the public can make an informed decision about how much privacy it’s willing to sacrifice.

Privacy advocates argue that recent history shows neither the U.S. government nor tech companies can be trusted to responsibly use the data of American citizens. There is also concern that privacy sacrifices that may seem reasonable in the midst of a pandemic could become permanent after the virus is contained. As evidence they point to the period following the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, when Congress authorized new surveillance measures to combat terrorism that have sparked accusations of civil liberties violations over the past two decades.

Others worry that too much data collection could inadvertently violate the core medical principle that personal health information remains anonymous. In South Korea, government disclosures of patient data contained enough information for the public to identify people by name. The Korean government reduced the amount of information in its reports out of fear that people would avoid getting tested if they were worried about the privacy of their results.

What’s next

The $2 trillion economic rescue package recently passed by the Senate includes provisions for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to develop a “public health surveillance and data collection system for coronavirus” within 30 days. The specifics of what that system will look like and whether any private tech firms will be involved have not been released.

Perspectives

Supporters

Increased surveillance has been shown to be a key factor in containing the virus

“Many countries that have successfully contained their outbreaks, including China, South Korea, and Singapore, have utilized aggressive surveillance measures to track and isolate infected individuals. Other countries that have been trigger-shy about similar measures, like Italy and Spain, now face devastating caseloads that have overwhelmed their health-care systems.” — Karen Hao, MIT Technology Review

The government must be transparent about how it’s using our data