From the Left

The left worries about a slippery slope toward encroaching on the freedom of the press.

“The Justice Department has made a very deliberate and careful move to focus not on WikiLeaks or Assange’s publication of classified documents but instead on the one moment in March 2010 when he appeared to briefly cross the line into computer hacking himself (and not very successfully, at that). It’s an interesting strategy and one that may create other problems for the Justice Department related to extradition and the statute of limitations, but it tries to sidestep concerns about what going after Assange might mean for journalists—a surprisingly cautious and measured choice for this Justice Department.”

Josephine Wolff, Slate

Yet many argue that the evidence “seems thin, limited mainly to Assange saying he’d had ‘no luck so far,’ apparently in relation to attempts to crack the password. The meatier parts of the indictment speak more to normal journalistic practices. In its press release, the Justice Department noted Assange was ‘actively encouraging Manning’ to provide more classified information...



“Reporters have extremely complicated relationships with sources, especially whistleblower types like Manning, who are often under extreme stress and emotionally vulnerable. At different times, you might counsel the same person both for and against disclosure. It’s proper to work through all the reasons for action in any direction, including weighing the public’s interest, the effect on the source’s conscience and mental health, and personal and professional consequences. For this reason, placing criminal penalties on a prosecutor’s interpretation of such interactions will likely put a scare into anyone involved with national security reporting going forward.”

Matt Taibbi, Rolling Stone

“Defenders of this indictment will drone on about the centrality of hacking. Fine and good. But powerful people down the road may not draw any such disciplined conclusions from the document; they may draw the reckless conclusion that the door is now open to insert the federal criminal apparatus more deeply into journalist-source interactions.”

Erik Wemple, Washington Post

Some lament the fact that “the Justice Department is likely to move aggressively to strip Assange of his core defenses… the government will ask the court to declare that the disclosure of the arguably unconstitutional surveillance program is immaterial. This would leave Assange with only the ability to challenge whether he helped with passwords and little or no opportunity to present evidence of his motivations or the threat to privacy. For the jurors, they could simply be faced with some Australian guy who helped with passwords in hacking national security information. It would be like trying a man for breaking and entering while barring evidence that the house was on fire and he thought he was rescuing people instead.”

Jonathan Turley, USA Today

One of Assange’s former colleagues writes, “Assange might be an asshole. Scratch that; Assange is an asshole. But we’re going to have to stand up for him anyway.”

James Ball, The Atlantic