The feds arrested the final Rudy Giuliani crony charged with violating campaign finance laws — nabbing the man early Wednesday at JFK Airport, according to law enforcement sources.

David Correia’s lawyer, Jeffrey Marcus, said his client had been traveling “in the Middle East” last week when the indictment came up charging him, Lev Parnas, Igor Fruman, and Andrey Kukushkin with conspiracy to violate campaign finance laws.

Correia was arrested Wednesday after his flight touched down at JFK.

Fellow Giuliani pals Lev Parnas, Igor Fruman and Andrey Kukushkin were arrested last week after the feds learned the Russian businessmen had booked one-way tickets to Vienna. Correia was also indicted, but remained at large until Wednesday.

Prosecutors claim the men schemed to channel illicit funds into local elections, and also conspired with an unnamed Russian national to inject foreign funds into Republican campaigns.

Correia is charged with scheming to hide foreign donations to a state-level Nevada political campaign, and planning to use a marijuana dispensary as a money-laundering front.

Correia — who co-owned a company called “Fraud Guarantee” with Parnas — remained largely silent during his brief Manhattan federal court appearance later Wednesday, only speaking when asked by Manhattan federal magistrate court judge Stewart Aaron if he understood the indictment.

“I’ve seen a copy, I haven’t read the whole thing,” he replied.

He was released on $250,000 secured bond, and is due back in court Thursday to be arraigned on conspiracy charges.

Giuliani allegedly used Parnas as his Ukrainian fixer, and leaned on the men and their connections as he investigated former Vice President Joe Biden and his son in Ukraine.

Parnas and Fruman are also accused of plotting with Republican ex-Rep. Pete Sessions in an attempt to oust former United States Ambassador to Ukraine Marie Yovanovitch from the region at the behest of foreign politicians.

Sessions is now cooperating with the federal investigation, his spokesman says.

Parnas and Fruman are scheduled to appear before a Manhattan federal court judge on Oct. 23.