Progressive Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (D-NY) railed against moderate Democrats for being “funded by billionaires” in a steadfast defense of political “purity tests,” all while neglecting to mention her own acceptance of a billionaire’s donation to her campaign.

The Democratic socialist darling, who has endorsed Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders’ presidential bid, made headlines Saturday for taking a stance against South Bend, Indiana, Mayor Pete Buttigeig, another Democrat vying for the 2020 nomination, for his defense of a California wine cave fundraiser he held that was attended by billionaires.

The fundraiser has widely been panned as being tone-deaf.

Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.), another leading 2020 Democratic contender, challenged the mayor at last week’s debate over his fundraising practices, leading Buttigieg to clap back that Warren was “issuing purity tests you yourself cannot pass,” due to the fact that the senator herself was a multimillionaire and he was not.

“For anyone who accuses us for instituting purity tests — it’s called having values,” AOC said at a Bernie Sanders rally in response.

“It’s called giving a damn. It’s called having standards for your conduct to not be funded by billionaires but to be funded by the people.”

There’s just one problem with AOC’s claim — she too has been funded by at least one billionaire: 2020 Democrat Tom Steyer.

Steyer, a longtime Democratic donor who has largely funded the majority of his presidential campaign, donated $2,700 to the Queens representative’s campaign on August 29, 2018, his campaign confirmed to The Post.

The donation was made through the former hedge fund manager’s family office, Fahr LLC, prior to his July 2019 announcement that he would seek the Democratic nomination.

Steyer’s 2020 spokeswoman previously told CNBC that Fahr LLC is not involved in his presidential campaign.

A spokesperson for Steyer told The Post “Tom’s proud to support Congresswoman Ocasio Cortez, a champion for working families in the Bronx and all across our country.

“She’s a leader in the fight to make the wealthy pay their fair share, provide a living wage for all workers, and pass a Green New Deal that combats climate change and helps reinvent the American economy.”

During AOC’s anti-billionaire tirade, she told the crowds, “I go into work all the time and I hear people say ‘what will my donors think?’ I hear that phrase. I hear and I see that billionaires get members of Congress on speed dial and waitresses don’t.”