Yesterday the New York Post reported that Congresswoman Ilhan Omar is having an affair with Democratic strategist Tim Mynett. The allegation was made in divorce papers filed by his wife. In July, Omar filed for divorce from her current husband. A refresher:

Dr. Beth Jordan Mynett says her cheating spouse, Tim Mynett, told her in April that he was having an affair with the Somali-born US representative and that he even made a “shocking declaration of love” for the Minnesota congresswoman before he ditched his wife, alleges the filing, submitted in DC Superior Court on Tuesday.

It turns out Mynett's firm was funneled a boat load of Omar's campaign cash. He was paid more than $200,000 for consulting and the campaign reimbursed at least $21,000 for his personal travel. That travel wasn't properly reported or itemized.

An official complaint regarding the large payments to Mynett's firm has already been filed, alleging she broke the law.

"Today, NLPC filed a Complaint with the Federal Election Commission (FEC) against Rep. Ilhan Omar (D-MN) alleging that she and her campaign violated the prohibition on the personal use of campaign funds by reimbursing political consultant Tim Mynett for his travel in 2019. The Complaint also alleges that Omar and her campaign failed to itemize the travel reimbursements, as required," the National Legal and Policy Center released in a statement Wednesday.

"Although Mynett's formal relationship with Rep. Omar's campaign began in July 2018, with the payment of $7000 directly to Mynett, the reimbursements for Mynett's travel did not commence until April 2019, the same month that Dr. Mynett alleges in her filing that her husband told her of the affair, and made a 'shocking declaration of love' for Rep. Omar," the complaint states.

According to the divorce filing, Mynett's "more recent travel and long work hours now appear to be more related to his affair with Rep. Omar than his actual work commitments."

And then there are these timing details from the Washington Examiner:

Here's the odd thing: The overwhelming majority of Omar's funds spent on the E Street Group were paid after she won the contested primary and during the totally noncompetitive general election race in her D+26 district. Contrary to FEC rules, Omar's filings did not designate whether her E Street Group disbursements (or any of her disbursements) were for the primary election or the general election.





Omar is refusing to discuss her "personal life" and has not commented on the issue of campaign funds being improperly used.

"I have no interest in allowing the conversation about my personal life to continue and so I have no desire to discuss it," Omar told CBS Minnesota today.





In June, Omar was ordered to payback thousands of dollars to her campaign after breaking campaign finance laws.