The U.S. lost 701,000 jobs in March, breaking a remarkable string of uninterrupted payrolls gains the past decade and revealing just the leading edge of the coronavirus-triggered hurricane that's upending America’s economy and labor market.

The unemployment rate jumped from a 50-year low of 3.5% to 4.4%, highest since August 2017, the Labor Department said Friday. That's also the sharpest monthly rise in unemployment since January 1975, according to TD Economics.

The report reflects employers’ jitters early in the month over the unprecedented economic fallout from the pandemic. But it doesn’t capture the nearly 10 million laid-off and furloughed Americans who filed initial jobless claims the past two weeks as much of the nation’s economy was shut down to contain the spread of the virus.

That’s because Labor’s survey was conducted the week ending March 14, before most states ordered residents to stay at home and nonessential businesses -- such as restaurants, movie theaters and most stores -- to close.

"This is terrible but unfortunately it's nothing compared to what's coming in April," says Ian Shepherdson, chief economist of Pantheon Macroeconomics.

Still, the 701,000 payroll losses are the most since 800,000 jobs were shed in March 2009 during the depths of the Great Recession and they end a record 113-month streak of gains dating to October 2010.

Economists surveyed by Bloomberg estimated that 100,000 jobs were lost last month.

U.S. stocks turned lower Friday in another volatile trading session after the government reported the big job losses. Also pushing the market lower: energy stocks gave up gains as crude prices lost momentum. The Dow Jones industrial average slumped about 500 points and the Standard & Poor’s 500 fell 2.2% in early afternoon trading.

Friday's report does capture the first stumble in the economy’s historic free fall. The number of workers filing initial jobless claims rose by 70,000 – the most since 2013 -- to 282,000 the week of Labor’s survey.

Yet Morgan Stanley reckoned the March employment figure mostly would underscore a sharp pullback in hiring by nervous businesses rather than the more recent wave of staggering layoffs. Net job gains or losses in any month are a combination of new hiring and job cuts.

Goldman Sachs, however, believes the March tally could signify substantial layoffs as well, noting that some of the 3.3 million Americans filing first-time jobless claims the week ending March 21 likely were let go the previous week. The number unemployed people rose by 1.4 million last month, Friday's report shows.

On Thursday, Labor said another 6.6 million workers filed claims last week. All told, Oxford Economics estimates the outbreak will result in 24 million job losses and a 14% unemployment rate in April alone, above the 10% peak reached during the Great Recession of 2007-09. Further job cuts should push unemployment to a peak of 16% in May, says Oxford Chief U.S. Economist Gregory Daco.

By comparison, it took about two years for the economy to lose nearly nine million jobs during the Great Recession.

Shamike Brown, 34, of Conway, South Carolina, lost her dream job as a specialist dealing with children’s developmental delays just three weeks after landing the position. Parents had stopped letting such specialists into their homes. And since she was a new hire, she was the first let go.

"Everybody was so proud of me and now I have nothing to show," Brown says.

The single mother of two applied for unemployment benefits but got a message that she was ineligible because of a technical mistake she made while applying. Her numerous calls to the state employment office have gone unanswered.

"I'm worried about how I'm going to pay my bills and get food,” Brown says. “I have kids at home that I have to homeschool and I'm trying not to let them see me stressed or worried about anything."

Most analysts say the economy is is already mired in a deep -- but likely short -- recession. Capital Economics predicts gross domestic output will fall at a stunning 40% annual rate in the second quarter.

Assuming the outbreak begins to wane by summer, economists expect a strong rebound in the second half of the year as shuttered businesses reopen. In the meantime, the $2.2 trillion dollar stimulus passed by Congress is intended to encourage many small businesses to retain, or rehire, employees by promising to forgive loan to firms that maintain staffs.

Still, the massive layoffs and lingering consumer fears of contagion could leave the economy diminished for some time, with unemployment that falls but remains elevated compared to pre-crisis levels.

In a sign of the economy's breathtaking turnabout, U.S. employers added well over 200,000 jobs in both January and February. Labor on Friday revised down gains for the two months by a total 59,000. But that still leaves strong payroll increases of 214,000 for January and 275,000 for February.

Historic layoffs:A record 6.6M Americans file for unemployment benefits as coronavirus wreaks havoc on economy

States in the crosshairs:Which states will be hit hardest by coronavirus-related job losses? See the list.

Industries that are slashing jobs

As expected, leisure and hospitality was hit hardest, with 459,000 job losses, though even that total reflects just the initial surge of cuts walloping the industry. Healthcare lost 61,000 jobs; professional and business services, 52,000; retail, 46,000; construction, 29,000; and manufacturing, 18,000.

The numbers show the breadth of the pandemic's impact across the economy. Even auto and other manufacturers have closed factories because of fears of infection. And professional businesses such as law and marketing firms are cutting jobs even though their white-collar employees can work from home as much of the economy remains paralyzed by uncertainty.

Government was among the few insulated sectors, adding 12,000 jobs, including 18,000 by the federal government, mostly temporary employees for the 2020 census.

Broader jobless measure soars

The 4.4% unemployment rate highlights only part of the economic devastation wrought by the outbreak. A broader measure of unemployment -- that includes Americans working part-time even though they want full-time jobs, discouraged workers who have stopped looking and the unemployed – leaped from 7%, near a 20-year low, to 8.7%, highest since March 2017.

Labor force participation slides

The share of Americans working or looking for jobs tumbled from a seven-year high of 63.4% to 62.7%, lowest since late 2017. That further reveals that the official unemployment rate doesn’t capture all of the workers pushed to the sidelines by the economic blows of the pandemic.

Wage growth ticks up

Average hourly earnings increased 11 cents to $28.62, bumping up the annual gain from 3.1% to 3%.

Many of the workers losing jobs last month were low-paid restaurant and retail workers, and that could have nudged average pay increases higher, economists said

Wage growth has hovered around 3% the past year despite falling unemployment that made it tougher for businesses to find qualified workers. Now, the recession is leaving a surplus of workers that's likely to push pay increases lower.

"Wage growth will likely slow sharply over the next few months," Shepherdson says.

Contributing: Jazmin Goodwin and Jessica Menton