This reluctance to articulate immigration’s benefits is especially striking given how readily its critics cite its supposed harms. They say immigrants increase crime, lower wages, threaten jobs, spread disease, strain government budgets and abet terrorism. The point isn’t that these claims are all true — immigrants have crime rates lower than natives — just that critics make their case in clear, concrete terms.

By contrast, progressives defend immigration with bland abstractions — “our diversity is our strength” — if they defend it at all. Most approach the issue through a civil rights lens, as a matter of doing justice to the poor and oppressed (which it is) rather than meeting America’s economic needs or slowing demographic decline (which it can be as well).

“People on the left have a hard time arguing why immigration is important to the country,” said Andrew Selee, president of the Migration Policy Institute, a nonpartisan research group that explores ways to lower migration’s costs and increase its benefits. “This is still one of the most pro-immigrant societies in the world, but that diffuse feeling hasn’t been matched with a coherent, cogent, succinct political case.”

The border crisis commands so much attention that legal immigration and its benefits are regularly overlooked. Many Americans would be surprised to learn that three-quarters of immigrants are here legally.

With the foreign-born share of the population nearing record highs, and restrictionists seeking cuts in legal admissions, progressives can’t afford to remain merely anti-anti-immigrant. If they want to sustain the longest, most diverse epoch of mass migration in American history, they need to explain why.

*

To understand the progressives’ mind-set, it is important to understand their two-decade quest for legalization and its bitter residue.

If the right sees the undocumented as invaders, the left sees them as victims of poverty and violence. Even more, it sees them as family and friends. The average undocumented person has been in the United States for 15 years. Many have American children. Progressives warn that deportation campaigns destabilize entire communities, harming immigrants and natives alike.