President Trump Donald John TrumpProtesters tear down, burn statue of Confederate general in DC US attorney in NYC who spearheaded probes of Trump allies refuses to leave as DOJ pushes ouster Trump to host 4th of July event despite pleas from lawmakers to cancel MORE's reelection campaign commented on progressive Sen. Bernie Sanders Bernie SandersOvernight Defense: Navy won't reinstate fired captain | Dems probe use of federal officers in DC | Air Force appoints woman as top noncommissioned officer Jamaal Bowman raises M, launches 0,000 ad buy ahead of New York primary Dems request watchdog probe use of federal law enforcement in DC during Floyd protests MORE's (I-Vt.) victory in the Nevada caucuses on Saturday, calling the win a domination by "big government socialism."

“Media reports of unstaffed caucus sites in Nevada just prove that the national Democrat Party is in chaos and incompetent," Trump's campaign manager Brad Parscale Bradley (Brad) James ParscaleMORE said in a statement, appearing to refer to a few logistical stumbles at the beginning of the caucuses.

"There is no denying that Big Government Socialism dominated again as Bernie Sanders remained the leader of the leftist pack. We are another day closer to Election Day and another day closer to re-electing President Trump," he continued.

ADVERTISEMENT

Sanders cemented his status as the front-runner in the race on Saturday after he was projected to win the third nominating contest by Saturday evening Eastern time.

Early returns showed the progressive senator dominating among young people and Latinos in Nevada and winning several downtown Las Vegas caucus sites, which tend to be dominated by the labor union rank and file.

Sanders's front-runner status has alarmed centrist and establishment Democrats who warn he will not be able to defeat Trump in a head-to-head match-up and could have a negative impact on down-ballot Democrats facing uphill reelection battles.

Former South Bend, Ind., Mayor Pete Buttigieg Pete ButtigiegJimmy Kimmel announces summer leave amid blackface controversy Obama to join Biden virtually for first joint fundraiser The Hill's Campaign Report: Biden marks 4th anniversary of Pulse nightclub shooting MORE and former New York City Mayor Mike Bloomberg both released memos this week projecting that Sanders will likely have a delegate lead coming out of Super Tuesday if the dynamics of the race do not change.