Two days after President Donald Trump lashed out at CNN over a poll showing him trailing former Vice President Joe Biden, his reelection campaign sent CNN a cease and desist letter Tuesday demanding the cable news network retract it and apologize.

The letter to CNN President Jeff Zucker, signed by Trump campaign legal adviser Jenna Ellis and Chief Operating Officer Michael Glassner, alleged the poll was "designed to mislead American voters through a biased questionnaire and skewed sampling."

"We stand by our poll," said Matt Dornic, a CNN spokesman, in response.

Trump lashed out at CNN on Monday after the network released the poll, which showed him trailing Biden by 14 percentage points and also showed his job approval rating had dropped 7 percentage points in one month.

"CNN Polls are as Fake as their Reporting," Trump tweeted. The president has regularly attacked news organizations when he does not like the results of their polling, even though the surveys are conducted by independent third parties such as SSRS, the survey and marketing company that conducted the CNN polls.

"Same numbers, and worse, against Crooked Hillary," he asserted. Despite Trump's claim, his numbers in CNN's polling were much better in June 2016, when the network found Clinton with a five-point lead over him.

Trump said he had "retained (a) highly respected pollster" to look at recent polls, "which I felt were FAKE based on the incredible enthusiasm we are receiving." He accused the news media of trying to "dampen" his support with negative poll numbers.

The Republican pollster he hired, McLaughlin & Associates, said the surveys were "skewed" because they don’t survey enough likely GOP voters.

"The bias seems to be an intentional strategy to suppress your vote," John McLaughlin, the firm’s CEO, wrote in a memo published on the company’s website Monday. "It has to be a strategy to counter the enthusiasm of Trump voters.

In the cease and desist letter, the campaign claimed the survey was a "stunt and a phony poll to cause voter suppression" and called it "intentionally false, defamatory and misleading."

CNN noted that several recent polls have found Trump trailing Biden by double-digits and notes that the methodology criticized by McLaughlin & Associates, such as not getting an even number of respondents from each party, is standard practice in polling.

McLaughlin & Associates also criticized CNN for not basing the poll on likely voters, but the network said because "it's difficult to project whether voters will participate in an election that is five months away," it "as do most public pollsters, typically reports results from likely voters around Labor Day."

And McLaughlin & Associates incorrectly said CNN's poll was not of registered voters. In fact, the numbers on the general election race were based on the responses from 1,125 registered voters.

The poll also found Trump trailing the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee 55%-41%, nearly three times the five-point deficit that CNN's May poll showed.

Conducted from June 2-5, it also found Trump's approval rating had sunk to 38% – its lowest level since January 2019 – and his disapproval rating had climbed to 57%. A CNN poll conducted from May 7-10 found 45% of Americans approved of the job Trump has done as president, while 51% disapproved.

Trump's performance in the CNN survey comes as protests against racism and excessive force by police continue across the U.S., sparked by the death of George Floyd, an unarmed black man killed when a white Minneapolis police officer knelt on his neck while he gasped for breath.

Monday's CNN poll found 31% of Americans approved of Trump's handling of race relations and 63% disapproved – comparable his approval rating on that issue after the 2017 clash between white nationalists and counterprotesters in Charlottesville, Virginia. One woman, Heather Heyer, was killed when a man ran his car into a group of counterprotesters.

Trump vs. Romney:Donald Trump bashes Mitt Romney again, this time over a Black Lives Matter march

Americans expressed strong support for the protests that followed Floyd's death, with 84% of the respondents saying they were justified. But 69% said the violence that broke out at some demonstrations was unjustified.

The president has threatened to use active-duty troops to quell the unrest and "dominate the streets." Two-thirds (65%) said Trump's response to the protests has made matters worse, while 26% said it was helpful. And 60% said it was "inappropriate" to deploy the U.S. military to handle the demonstrations.

Nearly nine-in-10 (89%) Americans said racism is a problem in the U.S., including 67% who said it was a "big problem." About two-thirds said the U.S. criminal justice system favors whites over blacks, while 24% said the races are treated equally. That reflects a shift from five years ago, when CNN's pollsters found 42% thought whites and blacks were treated the same and 50% said the system favored whites.

In Monday's poll, 63% of registered voters said Biden was better suited to deal with race relations.

A majority (55%) of voters also preferred Biden over Trump (41%) when it came to handling the other major crisis facing the nation, the coronavirus pandemic, which has killed more than 110,000 people in the U.S. By the same margin (55%-41%) Americans said they preferred Biden at the helm when it came to dealing with national crises in general.

Trump had an edge when it came to which candidate voters trust more to manage the economy, by a margin of 51%-46%. But the coronavirus has dramatically slowed economic growth and driven unemployment to levels not seen since the Great Depression, weakening the strong jobs numbers Trump had planned to make a cornerstone of his reelection campaign.

The poll had a margin of error of plus or minus 3.4 percentage points.

Contributing: David Jackson and Courtney Subramanian

'This is a rocket ship':Trump touts US jobs numbers amid protests, coronavirus tumult