A campaign organizer for Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders warned about mass violence and advocated for the use of gulags for "re-education" in a conversation caught on tape by James O’Keefe’s Project Veritas. In the undercover video, Kyle Jurek, an Iowa field organizer for the Sanders campaign, said the country will have to "spend billions" on re-education for people that are "Nazified."



Jurek said the candidate's "free education" policies will "teach you how not to be a f*cking Nazi." He touted post-war Germany spending money to "re-educate" people not to be a "f*cking Nazi." Jurek also said that people should "expect violent reaction" for speech, and warned that "Milwaukee will burn" if Sanders does not get the nomination. Milwaukee is the location of the 2020 Democratic National Convention.



"Do you even think that some of these like MAGA people could be re-educated?" an undercover reporter asked.



"I mean, we gotta try," Jurek answered. "Like, in Nazi Germany after the fall of the Nazi party there was a shit ton of the populace that was fucking Nazified. Germany had to spend billions of dollars re-educating their fucking people to not be Nazis."



"Like, we're probably going to have to do the same fucking thing here," he continued. "That's kind of what Bernie's fucking like, 'Hey, free education for everybody!' because we're going to have to teach you to not be a fucking Nazi."



"If Bernie doesn't get the nomination or it goes to a second round at the DNC convention, fucking Milwaukee will burn," Jurek warned. "It'll start in Milwaukee and then when they fucking, when the police push back on that, other cities will just fucking (blow up sound)."



"The cops are going be the ones that are getting fucking beating in Milwaukee," he added.



Jurek suggested the use of gulags for "re-education" of Trump supporters and praised political labor camps. He said gulags have been misunderstood and were actually "a lot better" than described, noting people were paid "a living wage" and allowed conjugal visits.



"There's a reason Joseph Stalin had gulags, right?" Jurek said. "Actually, gulags were a lot better than what the CIA has told us that they were. Like, people were actually paid a living wage in gulags, they had conjugal visits in gulags, gulags were actually meant for like re-education."



"Greatest way to breaking a fucking billionaire of their like privilege and the idea that they're superior, go out and break rocks for 12 hours a day. You're now a working-class person and you’re going to fucking learn what that means, right?"



