President-elect Donald Trump intends to nominate former Georgia Gov. Sonny Perdue to serve as agriculture secretary, according to a person familiar with the decision but not authorized to speak publicly before it is announced.

Mr. Perdue, 70, would be the first Southerner to lead the Agriculture Department in more than two decades. He comes from the small city of Bonaire in rural central Georgia, where he built businesses in grain trading and trucking.

The agriculture secretary job is the last Cabinet position for which Mr. Trump hasn’t named a candidate.

Mr. Perdue began his political career as a Democrat in the state Legislature in the 1990s. But it was after switching his allegiance to the Republican Party that Perdue made Georgia history.

In 2002, Mr Perdue was elected the state’s first Republican governor since the end of Reconstruction more than 130 years earlier. Mr. Perdue’s victory over an incumbent Democrat completed Georgia’s shift to a solidly Republican state, ending generations of Democratic control of state government.

Despite the seismic political change, Mr. Perdue showed little interest in pushing big programs or signature legislation during his two terms. Instead he focused on finding ways to save money while improving customer service by state agencies – such as reducing wait times for renewing driver’s licenses. He often referred to himself as Georgia’s CEO.

“If I could choose my legacy it would be the epithet that he made government work,” Mr. Perdue told The Associated Press in 2010 before he left office. “That’s really what I’ve focused on. It’s not some big monument.”

Critics accused Mr. Perdue of failing to tackle some of Georgia’s biggest problems, such as struggling public schools.

Mr. Perdue didn’t rely only on his business acumen as governor. A devout Southern Baptist, he also found a place for faith in his administration. In 2007, when a withering drought gripped Georgia and neighboring states, Mr. Perdue held a prayer rally in front of the state Capitol in Atlanta to pray publicly for rain.

It was also Mr. Perdue who brought an end to Georgia’s long-standing conflicts over a state flag that featured the Confederate battle emblem. The controversial flag was replaced by lawmakers under Mr. Perdue’s Democratic predecessor, but the new design proved unpopular. Mr. Perdue insisted Georgia voters should pick the flag. A referendum was held in 2004, though Southern heritage groups were outraged that the options did not include the old flag with the Confederate symbol.

Under Mr. Perdue’s watch, Georgia adopted tough new food-safety regulations after a deadly U.S. salmonella outbreak was traced to Georgia-made peanut butter. He moved the state office that issues water permits for irrigation and other agricultural uses from Atlanta to rural south Georgia, where it would be closer to farmers. And Mr. Perdue poured millions of state dollars into Go Fish, a program that aimed to lure bass fishing tournaments to the state.

The ex-governor, whose full name is George Ervin Perdue III, grew up in central Georgia. He attended the University of Georgia, where he played football as a walk-on and earned his doctorate in veterinary medicine. Following a stint in the Air Force, Mr. Perdue returned to Georgia and settled in Bonaire, a city of about 14,000 people.

Mr. Perdue already has family serving in Washington. His cousin, former Dollar General CEO David Perdue of Sea Island, Georgia, was elected to the U.S. Senate in 2014.

Sign up for Daily Newsletters Manage Newsletters

Copyright © 2020 The Washington Times, LLC.