“The 360” shows you diverse perspectives on the day’s top stories and debates.

What’s happening

One of America’s most popular entertainment genres is the police show. Stories about crime are exciting, dramatic and have drawn large audiences for decades. But as the police killings of George Floyd, Breonna Taylor and others have sparked widespread protests and the nation reckons with police brutality and systemic racism, TV shows about law enforcement have come under fresh scrutiny for their depiction of the criminal justice system.

In the past week, networks have pulled the police shows “Cops” and “Live PD.” The cancellations follow the protests over police brutality and a slew of viral videos showing cops beating, pepper spraying and teargassing peaceful protesters and journalists. Some actors who portray cops have been donating to bail funds in support of the Black Lives Matter movement and are urging their peers to match their contributions.

What we watch on TV can shape our view of reality, and millions have learned about the criminal justice system through police procedurals. Shows like “Law & Order” and “NCIS” use a well-known format: Cops and other law enforcement officials are the protagonists and investigate a new case each episode, often solving it by the episode’s end.

This structure grew out of a collaboration between the entertainment industry and police departments. For decades, law enforcement officers consulted on shows and used them to help shape their public image, steering showrunners in the direction of “good guy” portrayals. For example, the Los Angeles Police Department provided both ideas and financial support to the classic 1960s series “Dragnet” and vetted scripts before filming.

Why there’s debate

While the popularity of these shows — “Cops” ran for more than 30 years — proves that audiences love the crime drama, some critics say that the shows serve only to push an overly positive image of cops.

But supporters of police shows worry that their mass cancellation, an effect of “cancel culture,” threatens free speech. In some instances, the call has gone too far, they say, especially in the case of “Paw Patrol,” an animated children’s show about rescue dogs. Supporters also argue that it’s dangerous to censor all depictions of police, and say that there should still be room for some positive images of cops.

Advocates and most critics agree it’s unlikely that networks will cancel all shows. But critics argue it would be beneficial to reimagine the ways police are portrayed. They point to shows like “Orange Is the New Black,” where prison inmates are the protagonists, and “Watchmen,” which examines police brutality and white supremacy, as examples of what a cop shows can be.

Critics say many shows glorify cops, normalize racism and injustice in the criminal justice system and skew viewers’ perceptions of what constitutes police brutality. They point to an unfair balance in most shows, where cops are the heroes who viewers get to know over entire seasons, while victims and perpetrators are guest stars and disappear after a few episodes. Onscreen, cops have unrealistically high clearance rates and alleged criminals are quickly brought to trial. A report by the advocacy group Color of Change found that police shows failed to accurately depict interactions between police and people of color and that officers rarely face consequences for wrongdoing. Critics also argue that a lack of diversity in writers’ rooms makes it difficult to tell stories about race and police.

What’s next

The television industry is on hold during the coronavirus pandemic, but as debate around how shows depict police intensifies, there may be a shift in how entertainment programming tells stories about police and the criminal justice system.

Perspectives

Cops are overrepresented in media

“When we talk about representation in movies and television, we often point at the voices and faces that are missing. But we also need to look at the voices and faces that are overrepresented. Too often police are beacons of morality who never do wrong. Too often criminals are people of color, particularly black men. Too often victims are forgettable and laws optional when you carry a badge and a gun.” — Kelly Lawler, USA Today