President Trump Donald John TrumpProtesters tear down, burn statue of Confederate general in DC US attorney in NYC who spearheaded probes of Trump allies refuses to leave as DOJ pushes ouster Trump to host 4th of July event despite pleas from lawmakers to cancel MORE on Friday will become the first president to attend in-person the March for Life.

Trump quote-tweeted a video of last year's pro-life event, adding "See you on Friday...Big Crowd!"

The president addressed the gathering in 2018 via video stream, and Vice President Pence attended in 2019.

See you on Friday...Big Crowd! https://t.co/MFyWLG4HFZ — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) January 22, 2020

Jeanne Mancini, president of March for Life, hailed the Trump administration's efforts to appoint conservative justices and cut funding for abortions.

ADVERTISEMENT

"President Trump and his Administration have been consistent champions for life and their support for the March for Life has been unwavering," she said in a statement. "We are grateful for all these pro-life accomplishments and look forward to gaining more victories for life in the future.”

Trump has appealed to evangelical and conservative voters by cutting off funding for services and organizations that provide abortions and touting the appointment of pro-life judges.

He has repeatedly hammered Democrats for supporting late-term abortion, seizing on proposals in New York and Virginia that would have allowed third-trimester abortions in certain cases where the fetus or mother's health is at risk.

The president in last year's State of the Union address urged Congress to pass legislation outlawing late-term abortions.

Tuesday marked the 47th anniversary of Roe v. Wade, the landmark ruling that established the right to abortion nationwide.

A poll released Tuesday from the Kaiser Family Foundation found the public is still divided on the issue: Nearly 60 percent said abortion should be legal in all or most cases, while 41 percent said it should be illegal in all or most cases.