From the Left

The left sees Schumer’s remarks as counterproductive and encourages the Supreme Court to strike down the law.

“Not only did Schumer's rhetoric Wednesday sound foolishly threatening, but it reinforced a persistent view too many Americans hold about their political leadership — that Democrats and Republicans are really nothing more than two sides of the same coin… Schumer ‘must pay a severe price for this!’ Trump tweeted Wednesday night, displaying a distinct lack of self awareness… In the fall, Democratic leaders will want to draw a stark contrast with that kind of provocation. That means rising above Trump's attacks on the judiciary or, in the case of House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, refraining from tearing up Trump's State of the Union address. Drawing a contrast means having the discipline to avoid stooping to Trump's level.”

Editorial Board, USA Today

“Democrats are in a real conundrum. On the one hand, many of the Democratic Party’s problems — and American democracy’s problems — stems from the fact that our system is not particularly democratic. If Democrats insist on clinging to all established norms, they entrench a system that locks a majority of voters out of power…



“Yet while Democrats could be justified in breaking down some norms that undercut democracy (like, say, the filibuster), Schumer’s statement achieves no policy goal. It neither makes our government less dysfunctional, nor is it likely to inspire Gorsuch or Kavanaugh to behave less ideologically. It’s an unforced error that invites a reprisal without benefiting anyone. Chief Justice Roberts is right that Schumer’s comments are the sort of remarks that have no place in a healthy democracy. But the United States is not a healthy democracy. Until that problem is fixed, the continuing erosion of democratic norms is inevitable.”

Ian Millhiser, Vox

Regarding the proposed law, “More than 450 similarly burdensome laws — known as TRAP, or targeted regulation of abortion providers — have passed in states nationwide over the past decade, closing scores of clinics in the name of protecting women’s safety. It’s a confounding rationale — people are generally made safer with more access to health care, not less. And abortion in particular is one of the safest medical procedures there is. Patients are more likely to land in the hospital after having their wisdom teeth removed than they are after an abortion… Concealing an anti-abortion agenda under the guise of efforts to protect women’s health has been an effective legal strategy, though some of those TRAP laws have been successfully challenged in court… Better to quietly chip away at Roe, the thinking goes, than to rip it away at once.”

Editorial Board, New York Times



“The admitting privileges requirement will not make anyone safer, but it does demonstrably shutter abortion clinics. As a result, less than four years ago, the Supreme Court struck down a nearly identical Texas law in Whole Woman’s Health v. Hellerstedt* after finding that the law provided no benefit to offset the ‘undue burden’ it imposed upon women in Texas… If the Supreme Court now rules in favor of Louisiana, the court will upend its own legal precedent in Whole Woman’s Health* and further erode public confidence in our judiciary, all in pursuit of restricting abortion access.”

Julie F. Kay and Kathryn Kolbert, Slate