President Richard Nixon got the same result when he tried to prevent prosecutors from getting his Oval Office tapes on the ground that they were protected by executive privilege.

Mr. Trump doesn’t have as strong a claim as either of his predecessors, since the records now being sought aren’t government documents possibly subject to privilege; and they aren’t even in Mr. Trump’s possession — they are sought from his accountants and bankers — so it’s not a burden for him to hand them over.

On the other side, Doug Letter, the lawyer for the House of Representatives, did a poor job of allaying the justices’ fears about Congress abusing its subpoena power. “At some point,” Justice Clarence Thomas said, “this thing gets out of control.” Mr. Letter offered no clear limit.

And what about the subpoena issued by Mr. Vance, the Manhattan prosecutor, who is an actual law enforcement authority? Mr. Trump lost this case in the lower courts, too — and then he appealed to the Supreme Court to overturn that ruling on the ground of temporary “absolute immunity.” In other words, arguing that there can be effectively no legal oversight of the president while he is in office. Could he shoot someone on Fifth Avenue and be immune from investigation or prosecution? Mr. Trump’s lawyers made this exact argument in a federal appeals court last year.

They lost then, but the central logic behind their effort is clear: Protect Mr. Trump now and set a precedent that future presidents are beyond the reach of the law while in office. Whether it is strong-arming the F.B.I. director to drop a criminal investigation into a former top aide, or conniving with his own attorney general to seek revenge against his enemies, or breaking the law to withhold hundreds of millions of dollars in military aid to Ukraine in the hope of damaging a political opponent — Mr. Trump believes, as he put it, “I can do whatever I want as president.”

Presidents have a difficult job. They may enjoy certain protections the rest of us don’t, including immunity from indictment while in office (though that is a matter of legal interpretation, not law). But that doesn’t mean they are free to ignore the law as they see fit. Presidents Nixon and Clinton both got that message loud and clear, from a unanimous court.

It’s doubtful that the court under Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr., which is as polarized as it has been in a century, will see eye to eye. But Tuesday’s cases shouldn’t be difficult, and for a simple reason: Presidents are not, and cannot be, above the law.