Roger Kimball says all these riots and mayhem is a replay of 1968-72. Excerpts:

The violence that is exploding across the country now has almost nothing to doing with the killing of George Floyd, a black man, by Derek Chauvin, a white policeman. That was merely the catalyst for a process that has deep roots in American culture.

The moral is: ideas matter. For decades now, our colleges and universities (and increasingly our grades schools) have been preaching a gospel of cultural self-hatred. America, according to this gospel, is evil. The country is inextricably racist and beholden to an irredeemably exploitative economic system. The latest retelling of this creation myth is the Pulitzer-Prize-winning ‘1619 Project’ whose fundamental message is that America was started as a ‘slavocracy.’ According to this malignant fantasy, the Revolutionary War was fought primarily ‘to protect the institution of slavery.’ At last count, elements of this disgusting bit of historical revisionism were being adopted in the curricula of some 4,000 school districts.

They are also working themselves out the streets of our cities. One contingent is made up of ordinary or garden variety hooligans, young men and women (mostly men) who are out to loot and smash up whatever they can.

Kimball says that the woke intellectuals are more dangerous, because they spread their destructive ideology in the universities, which is how they get dispersed through networks of elites. Many of you readers are forwarding to me messages you are receiving from corporations and corporate leaders pledging allegiance to Black Lives Matter, but of course saying nothing (about hatred and violence) that contradicts the preferred progressive narrative.

Here is a passage from my forthcoming book Live Not By Lies that describes what is happening now:

In our populist era, politicians and talk-radio polemicists can rile up a crowd by denouncing elites. Nevertheless, in most societies, intellectual and cultural elites determine its long-term direction. “[T]he key actor in history is not individual genius but rather the network and the new institutions that are created out of those networks,” writes sociologist James Davison Hunter. Though a revolutionary idea might emerge from the masses, says Hunter, “it does not gain traction until it is embraced and propagated by elites” working through their “well-developed networks and powerful institutions.” This is why it is critically important to keep an eye on intellectual discourse. Those who don’t, leave the gates unguarded. As the Polish dissident and émigré Czesław Miłosz put it, “It was only toward the middle of the twentieth century that the inhabitants of many European countries came, in general unpleasantly, to the realization that their fate could be influenced directly by intricate and abstruse books of philosophy.” Arendt warns that the twentieth-century totalitarian experience shows how a determined and skillful minority can come to rule over an indifferent and disengaged majority. In our time, most people regard the politically correct insanity of campus radicals as not worthy of attention. They mock them as “snowflakes” and “social justice warriors.”

This is a serious mistake. In radicalizing the broader class of elites, social justice warriors (SJWs) are playing a similar historic role to the Bolsheviks in prerevolutionary Russia. SJW ranks are full of middle-class, secular, educated young people wracked by guilt and anxiety over their own privilege, alienated from their own traditions, and desperate to identify with something, or someone, to give them a sense of wholeness and purpose. For them, the ideology of social justice—as defined not by church teaching but by critical theorists in the academy—functions as a pseudo-religion. Far from being confined to campuses and dry intellectual journals, SJW ideals are transforming elite institutions and networks of power and influence.

Back to Roger Kimball for a second. He writes:

It wasn’t long ago that we were assured that the ‘end of history’ was nigh: that a Western-style liberalism was on the verge of establishing itself the world over and that peace and amity were breaking out everywhere. But instead of that attractive version of the end of history, we are now witnessing something like the retribalization of the world: a violent turn against Western liberalism and its tradition of rationality, respect for individual rights, and recognition of a common good that transcends the accidents of ethnic and racial identity. Given this situation, it is all the more imperative that we educate our students in the Western tradition, that we teach them about the virtues of our society and its democratic institutions. Such education is the staunchest bulwark against the forces of disintegration we are facing.

To which I say: yes, but.

It is without doubt the case that we have to educate our students in the Western tradition, though we must do so with a much sharper edge that comes from awareness that we are teaching them to be cultural subversives. The things we will teach them run contrary to the new order. When I wrote in The Benedict Option about the importance of classical Christian education, my idea was that this form and content of instruction would parallel what the Benedictine monks did in the early Middle Ages: hand on to the next generation the knowledge it needed to know to keep truth and tradition alive through the long night of civilization.

We are there now. We have been there for a while, but surely now even the most ardent deniers have had their eyes opened by how quickly American cities have turned into zones of barbaric pillaging. If you are still thinking that things are fine, then I ask you: what is it going to take?

So if I agree with Kimball, why the “but”? Because I believe we have moved into a stage of our culture in which the dominant culture will not leave us alone in any way, on the grounds that leaving “racism” unaddressed anywhere is a moral failing. The pressure in the culture, from woke capitalism, from the news and entertainment media, and certainly from academia, will be overwhelming. In The Benedict Option, I wrote about the Benda family of Prague, who, like everybody else, had to send their children to communist schools. They had to teach them at home to reject the party line. In Live Not By Lies, I ask Kamila Bendova, Vaclav Benda’s widow, how they did it? In this excerpt from the book, she offers one part of the strategy:

Despite the demands of her job teaching at the university, Kamila made time to read aloud to her children for two to three hours daily. “Every day?” I ask, stunned. “Every day,” she affirms. She read them fairy tales, myths, adventure stories, and even some horror classics. More than any other novel, though, J. R. R. Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings was a cornerstone of her family’s collective imagination. Why Tolkien? I ask. “Because we knew Mordor was real. We felt that their story”—that of the hobbits and others resisting the evil Sauron—“was our story too. Tolkien’s dragons are more realistic than a lot of things we have in this world.” “Mom read The Lord of the Rings to us maybe six times,” recalls Philip Benda. “It’s about the East versus the West. The elves on one side and the goblins on the other. And when you know the book, you see that you first need to fight the evil empire, but that’s not the end of the war. Afterward, you have to solve the problems at home, within the Shire.” This is how Tolkien prepared the Benda children to resist communism, and also to resist the idea that the fall of communism was the end of their quest for the Good and the True. After communism’s collapse, they found ways to contribute to the moral reconstruction of their nation. Patrik says the key is to expose children to stories that help them know the difference between truth and falsehood, and teach them how to discern this in real life. “What my mom always encouraged in us and supported was our imagination, through the reading of books or playing with figures,” he says. “She also taught us that the imagination was something that was wholly ours, that could not be stolen from us. Which was also something that differentiated us from others.”

It should go without saying that we must instruct our children that racism is evil. But this is part of any truly liberal education. What’s happening now is that ideologues, many of them not fully aware of what they are doing, are taking advantage of the persistence of an old and universal human evil — hating the Other by race — and using it to carry out a far more sweeping agenda. We cannot count on universities anymore. Here is part of the letter that Linda Livingstone, the president of Baylor University, one of the largest Christian universities in the US, sent out: