British Prime Minister David Cameron steps down on Wednesday and Theresa May prepares to take his place following a momentous referendum to leave the European Union that has sent shockwaves around the world.

Cameron will hold his final weekly question and answer session in parliament before tendering his resignation to Queen Elizabeth II at Buckingham Palace.

The monarch will then call on May to form a government and the newly-anointed prime minister will make a statement outside her new Downing Street residence.

8:27pm – Britain’s New Foreign Sec Will Have An Awkward Time Dealing With Turkey

Just weeks ago, Boris Johnson won a competition in The Spectator for writing this poem about Turkish President Erdogan having sex with a goat:

There was a young fellow from Ankara Who was a terrific wankerer Till he sowed his wild oats With the help of a goat But he didn’t even stop to thankera.

8:13pm – David Davis is Brexit Secretary

David Davis (Leave) will be the minister in charge of Britain’s Brexit negotiations.

8:08pm – Liam Fox is Trade Secretary

Liam Fox (Leave) has been appointed to head a new Department for International Trade.

8:00pm – Michael Fallon re-appointed Defence Secretary

Michael Fallon (Remain) will continue as Defence Secretary.

7:52 – Amber Rudd is Home Secretary

Amber Rudd (Remain) will replace Theresa May as Home Secretary.

7.45pm – Boris Johnson is Foreign Secretary

In a surprise announcement, Boris Johnson (Leave) has been appointed Foreign Secretary.

7.15pm – Hammond is Chancellor, Osborne out

Philip Hammond (Remain) is the first minister to meeting the new PM. Reports emerging he is the new Chancellor. George Osborne has resigned from the government.

Breaking: George Osborne was sacked. Theresa May told him she didn't want him in her Cabinet. Wow. — Tom Newton Dunn (@tnewtondunn) July 13, 2016

6.51pm – Remain protesters arrested after trying to attack pro-Brexit protest:

Photo by Rachel Megawhat:

6:35pm – Exclusive Pics As New PM Enters Downing Street:

By Rachel Megawhat:

6.30pm – Pro-Brexit Protest As May Becomes PM:

By Rachel Megawhat:

6.21pm – May is now beginning her first tasks as PM:

The new Prime Minister is receiving a security briefing after which the first appointments of her government are expected to be announced.

6.02pm – May addresses the nation:

New Uk PM @theresa_may: David Cameron led One Nation government. It is in that spirit that I intend to lead. #MayDay pic.twitter.com/E99JYtK4G7 — Jon Williams (@WilliamsJon) July 13, 2016

The UK's new prime minister Theresa May arrives in Downing Street pic.twitter.com/ADXKsZwtio — Nick Eardley (@nickeardleybbc) July 13, 2016

So Theresa Did pic.twitter.com/uQBnX2i4PX — Adam Boulton (@adamboultonSKY) July 13, 2016

This is a rehash of the speech May gave when she announced her candidacy for leader 2 weeks ago — Chris Ship (@chrisshipitv) July 13, 2016

5.58pm – May Leaves Buckingham Palace:

The new Prime Minister is on her way to Downing Street.

5.53pm – Juncker Congratulates May:

My warmest congratulations to @theresa_may – I look forward to working closely with you and wish you every success pic.twitter.com/lG1hWw36aO — Jean-Claude Juncker (@JunckerEU) July 13, 2016

5:40pm – Theresa May Confirmed As Prime Minister:

.@Theresa_May has been officially appointed the second female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom pic.twitter.com/fBtbicqMqq — Sky News (@SkyNews) July 13, 2016

Theresa May meets the Queen as she is appointed new PM https://t.co/KhyTKxNdjL pic.twitter.com/EtDOd43WQu — ITV News (@itvnews) July 13, 2016

5:33pm – Cameron has already changed his Twitter bio:

5:28pm – Theresa May arrives at Buckingham Palace:

BREAKING: Theresa May arrives at Buckingham Palace to be confirmed as British prime minister. — The Associated Press (@AP) July 13, 2016

5:25pm – Buckingham Palace confirms Cameron’s resignation:

#Breaking David Cameron officially tenders resignation as prime minister, Buckingham Palace announces pic.twitter.com/DLkHGPr1nY — Press Association (@PA) July 13, 2016

5:21pm – Theresa May is on her way to Buckingham Palace:

Queen Elizabeth II is about to appoint Theresa May as her 13th Prime Minister. In the mean time:

HM the Queen has now (temporarily) assumed absolute control of the United Kingdom. — Britain Elects (@britainelects) July 13, 2016

5.16pm – Westminster’s favourite artist welcomes Theresa May:

Artist Kaya Mar has drawn this portrait of Theresa May to welcome her to 10 Downing Street. pic.twitter.com/CoMugHSqGp — Christopher Hope (@christopherhope) July 13, 2016

5.12pm – Exclusive Pics Of Cameron’s Farewell Speech

By Rachel Megawhat:

5.06pm – There is presently no Prime Minister

With David Cameron having submitted his resignation and Theresa May not yet appointed, Britain is briefly an absolute monarchy as the Queen temporarily takes on the Prime Minister’s powers.

She probably will not exercise them, though.

So PM has resigned – May not there yet, Her Majesty has briefly "taken back control" — Faisal Islam (@faisalislam) July 13, 2016

4:58pm – David Cameron is now meeting the Queen to submit his resignation

David Cameron arrives at Buckingham Palace to formally resign as prime minister https://t.co/j1VPzAhuiE pic.twitter.com/1t30Gf8YU0 — ITV News (@itvnews) July 13, 2016

4:40pm – Cameron Says Goodbye:

Crowds watch David Cameron's speech at the end of Downing St, listening in their iPhones. #DavidCameron pic.twitter.com/qgq0HrpWkI — Christopher Hope (@christopherhope) July 13, 2016

Watch Live: David Cameron's speech leaving 10 Downing St – thanks his family: https://t.co/1nuVPEYw0c pic.twitter.com/HcuyoqdZMK — Reuters UK (@ReutersUK) July 13, 2016

4:35pm – Tusk Congratulates May

Donald Tusk, president of the European Council, has prematurely congratulated Theresa May:

4:23 – Queen arrives back at Buckingham Palace for power transfer:

3:53pm – Leading “moderniser” Nick Boles leaves the government:

Skills Minister Nick Boles has announced he is leaving his role and returning to the back benches — Sky News Breaking (@SkyNewsBreak) July 13, 2016

Unclear whether he’s resigned or been sacked.

3.09pm – The first anti-May protests outside Downing Street:

And they’re already making fun of new PM Theresa May outside Downing Street pic.twitter.com/LGyoVdb6pB — Peter Henley (@BBCPeterH) July 13, 2016

2:54pm – Telegraph reports Osborne is to Leave Treasury:

No word yet on whether he’s been moved or sacked completely.

2:41pm – Cameron to meet Queen at 5pm:

David Cameron will travel to Buckingham Palace to tender his resignation to the Queen at 5pm. As it will be tea time, she may invite him to stay and chat for a while before summoning Theresa May.

2:35pm – May delivers 2,000 new UKIP members:

https://twitter.com/RaheemKassam/status/753220239530270720

2:28pm – Delivery Van at Downing Street:

1.54pm – ITV says May will appoint Remain-Supporting Foreign Sec as Chancellor:

1.11pm – Breitbart London’s editor-in-chief writes:

Jeremy Corbyn Is Right: Cameron’s Legacy Is Freeing Terrorists And Gay Marriage https://t.co/X5mVSk0YOW pic.twitter.com/P4clmgawWr — Breitbart London (@BreitbartLondon) July 13, 2016

1.00pm – Cameron leaves Westminster for the last time as PM:

12:37pm – Cameron applauded as he finishes his last ever PMQs:

Poor show from the Labour front bench. Not impressed in our office! pic.twitter.com/q5mI0pMLRW — Kay Burley (@KayBurley) July 13, 2016

12:25 – Labour MP Jeff Smith sticks it to Cameron:

He asks the outgoing Prime Minister: “He came into power planning to get rid of the deficit and to stop his party banging on about Europe. How has that gone?”

12:21pm – Cameron says Britain should stay as close as possible to the EU

12:18 – Corbyn says goodbye by attempting some jokes:

JC rumour going round you are going to join Strictly DC I don't have a passé double — Adam Boulton (@adamboultonSKY) July 13, 2016

Corbyn says he wishes PM & his family well & asks him to pass on thanks to his mum for her advice on his clothes. Nice touch. #PMQs — Sophy Ridge (@SophyRidgeSky) July 13, 2016

12:05pm – Corbyn thanks Cameron for gay marriage

https://twitter.com/RaheemKassam/status/753184137947873280

Corbyn "it's only right" to thank PM for his service, mentions gay marriage but adds it was Labour votes that helped it pass #PMQs — Sophy Ridge (@SophyRidgeSky) July 13, 2016

Midday – Cameron Gives Last PMQs

.@David_Cameron begins final #PMQs with Wimbledon and a joke: "the diary for the rest of my day is remarkably light" https://t.co/998FPchzWV — Sky News (@SkyNews) July 13, 2016

Theresa May is here. Huge roar. Dark suit, red shoes. Labour MP says: "Mr Speaker i didn't know I was that popular." #PMQs — Christopher Hope (@christopherhope) July 13, 2016

11:50am – May spokeswoman confirms special Brexit department:

A spokeswoman for Mrs May said: “Civil servants have already been charged with finding a building to house the Brexit department – an indication of Theresa’s commitment to get on with delivering the verdict of the EU referendum. Brexit means Brexit and we’re going to make a success of it.”

She added: “It was Theresa that set up the campaign to elect more female MPs to parliament – and she has always believed that there should be more women in prominent government positions.”

11:23am – Here’s a running order of what we expect to happen today:

Midday – Cameron takes his last ever Prime Minister’s Questions in the House of Commons.

Early afternoon – Cameron travels to Buckingham Palace to formally hand his resignation to the Queen.

Mid-afternoon – The Queen invites Theresa May to form a government.

Evening – the first new cabinet appointments may be announced.

10:34am – Brutal honesty from one MP:

Reshuffle Time. 72 hours of saying congratulations to colleagues through gritted teeth while thinking "it should have been me". #SuchFun — James Cleverly (@JamesCleverly) July 13, 2016

10:22am – David Cameron pictured leaving Downing Street. For the last time?

David Cameron leaves 10 Downing Street to face Prime Minister's Questions for the last time as PM #PMQs pic.twitter.com/1sz8s70qzz — Press Association (@PA) July 13, 2016

Original Story:

(AFP) – British Prime Minister David Cameron steps down on Wednesday and Theresa May prepares to take his place following a momentous referendum to leave the European Union that has sent shockwaves around the world.

Cameron will hold his final weekly question and answer session in parliament before tendering his resignation to Queen Elizabeth II at Buckingham Palace.

The monarch will then call on May to form a government and the newly-anointed prime minister will make a statement outside her new Downing Street residence.

European leaders have asked the government to move quickly to renegotiate its relationship with the EU but May has indicated she will not be rushed into triggering the formal procedure for Brexit.

The 59-year-old, who will become Britain’s second female prime minister after Margaret Thatcher, also has to attempt to bridge Conservative Party divisions and deal with a potential economic downturn.

Her other daunting challenges include keeping pro-EU Scotland from bidding for independence in order to stay in the 28-nation bloc, and weaving new global trade and diplomatic alliances to prepare for a post-Brexit future.

– Clouds start to disperse –

May campaigned with Cameron for Britain to stay in the EU and she will also have to convince Brexit supporters that she will implement the result of the June 23 referendum to leave the EU as she has promised.

After six years in office, Cameron announced he would resign the day after the vote. He will chiefly be remembered for proposing the referendum in the first place and then spectacularly failing to clinch it.

He sought to deflect that criticism in an interview with the Daily Telegraph on Wednesday, saying: “As I leave, I hope people will see a stronger country, a thriving economy and more chances to get on in life.

“It has been a privilege to serve the country I love.”

May’s bid for his job accelerated as key proponents of Britain’s EU withdrawal, including charismatic former mayor of London Boris Johnson, stepped back in a head-spinning round of political bloodletting.

The vote exposed deep inequalities in British society which May has promised to address and upended the political scene, sending her Conservatives and the main opposition Labour Party into turmoil.

Labour’s embattled leader Jeremy Corbyn, who was accused of failing to persuade working-class voters to back EU membership, now faces a bitter leadership contest of his own against rebel lawmaker Angela Eagle.

Investors will be watching May’s first days in office closely but with greater optimism as the value of the pound, which fell by up to 15 percent against the dollar and the euro in the days of the Brexit vote, has rebounded on news of her impending promotion.

“Theresa May’s virtual ‘coronation’ as prime minister has delivered a boost to the pound as the clouds of uncertainty following the Brexit vote start to disperse,” said market analyst Neil Wilson at ETX Capital, a financial trading company in London.

May is expected to begin announcing cabinet picks later on Wednesday and these could reportedly include current energy minister Amber Rudd, foreign minister Philip Hammond and Brexit campaigner Chris Grayling, the Conservatives’ House of Commons leader.

– Leopard-skin heels –

May has been a tough-talking interior minister for the past six years and is something of an unknown quantity internationally, although she has received ringing endorsements from party colleagues and a normally sceptical British tabloid press.

She is also liked in and around Maidenhead, the well-to-do commuter town west of London that she has represented in parliament since 1997.

“She will get this country back on its feet,” said 69-year-old Jim Charlesworth, a neighbour of May and her banker husband Philip.

Martin Trepte, editor of the Maidenhead Advertiser, the local newspaper, said: “She’s a mature, grown-up, no-nonsense politician. She knows her stuff.”

The daughter of a Church of England vicar, May is a cricket fan with a sober, well-mannered demeanour who lists her hobbies as cooking and walking.

She shows a flash of flamboyance with a colourful shoe collection — particularly her leopard-skin heels — which has become famous in the British press.