The United States has officially become the hardest-hit country in the world by the global coronavirus pandemic, confirming a world-high 82,285-plus coronavirus cases, surpassing China, where it originated.

"I think it's a tribute to our testing," President Donald Trump told reporters Thursday at the coronavirus task force daily briefing.

"We're testing a tremendous number of people," he added, questioning the data coming out of China.

The data is complied by Johns Hopkins University and Worldometer, which culls the data from a variety of sources.

While the data milestone is a potential mark against the U.S. response to the pandemic, it does show the U.S. has been conducting more tests than any country in the world. Vice President Mike Pence announced more than 552,000 tests have been conducted in the U.S. to date. That is a 14.9% rate of positives for every coronavirus test administered, although that includes some people who have had the virus and needed subsequent tests to be cleared of infection.

Also, the U.S. death total of 1,177 is the sixth-highest in the world, suggesting the U.S. healthcare system is helping keep Americans alive at a higher rate than European countries.

"The people that die, the percentage is much lower than I ever thought," Trump said. "That's one of the reasons, I say, we're going to beat this, and we're going to get back to work."

The U.S. confirmed-case death rate is just 1.4%, while the other most-infected countries are far less effective in keeping its infected citizens alive.

At the White House task force's daily news conference on Thursday, officials identified Chicago and Detroit areas as potential new hot spots for the virus in the U.S.

Dr. Deborah Birx, the coordinator of the White House coronavirus response, told reporters officials are concerned about rapid increases in cases in Cook County, Ill., and Wayne County, Mich., according to The Hill. The two counties encapsulate the cities and surrounding communities of Chicago and Detroit, respectively.

"We have integrated all of our information to not only look at where the cases are today, but how they’re moving so we can alert FEMA to where we think the next potential hot spot is," Birx said in the Hill report.

The Seattle area, where many early cases centered around an adult care facility, also remains a hot spot. And rising fast in infections is New Orleans, in part because last month's Carnival festivities there offered a ripe opportunity for the virus to spread widely.

Indeed, New Orleans has the world's highest growth rate for virus cases, with the metro area accounting for some 70% of the roughly 1,800 cases in Louisiana. The transmission rate there has dimmed some hopes that warm climates and more sparsely populated communities would be less susceptible to the coronavirus. And some observers fear the proliferation of cases there could be a prelude to outbreaks in other major Southern cities, like Houston.

Confirmed-Case Death Rates by Top 10 Most-Infected Countries

U.S. 1.4%. China 4%. Italy 10.2%. Spain 7.4% Germany 0.6%. Iran 7.6%. France 5.8%. Switzerland 1.6%. United Kingdom 5.0%. South Korea 1.4%.

On the world stage, only Germany has done a better job with keeping its confirmed-case death rate below that of the United States.

New York state, particularly because of New York City, has been the hardest-hit area in the U.S. with over 37,000 confirmed cases. Only four other countries have more infections than New York state.

U.S. Army leaders said Thursday that two field hospitals are on their way to New York City and will be able to begin treating patients at the Javits Center on Monday.

The Army combat units from Fort Hood, Texas, and Fort Campbell, Kentucky, will include as many as 700 personnel and almost 300 beds. Those medical personnel will also be able to help staff additional beds and medical equipment that are being brought in by state and local authorities.

Gen. James McConville, chief of staff of the Army, said they will begin setting up the units this weekend at the center. Officials expect there will be a couple thousand beds in the center to treat patients that do not have the virus.

An Army combat hospital from Fort Carson, Colorado, who will be heading to Seattle. McConville said advance staff are already there, and are working with local officials to review several potential locations to set up the unit.

Information from The Associated Press was used in this report.