Advertisement

Boris Johnson (pictured as his health worsened on April 3) has spent the night in intensive care but there has been 'no change' in his coronavirus condition

Boris Johnson is still battling coronavirus in intensive care today with 'no change' in his condition overnight - amid a wave of support from across the nation.

Mr Johnson was moved to ICU at St Thomas' Hospital in central London and given oxygen after his health deteriorated sharply over just two hours, leaving doctors fearing he will need a ventilator.

The 55-year-old was transferred to intensive care at 7pm because of breathing difficulties - forcing him to 'deputise' Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab to take the reins of government.

In a round of broadcast interviews this morning, Cabinet minister Michael Gove said Mr Johnson was getting the 'best care'.

'As we speak the PM is in intensive care being looked after by his medical team receiving the very, very best care from the team in St Thomas's and our hopes and prayers are with him and with his family,' he told BBC Breakfast.

Mr Gove played down concerns that the government will be paralysed with the leader out of action.

'The Cabinet is the supreme decision making body,' he said.

The Queen is being kept informed about Mr Johnson's condition, while Mr Raab will chair a meeting of the government coronavirus task force this morning.

Meanwhile, Donald Trump revealed he has offered to send Mr Johnson experimental drugs to treat his coronavirus.

'I've asked two of the leading companies ... They've come with the solutions and just have done incredible jobs – and I've asked him to contact London immediately,' Mr Trump said. 'The London office has whatever they need. We'll see if we can be of help. We've contacted all of Boris's doctors, and we'll see what is going to take place, but they are ready to go.'

The PM's sharp downturn came 11 days after he first suffered coronavirus symptoms and went into isolation. He looked increasingly unwell when glimpsed in public and in 'selfie' videos posted on on social media, and ministers were then shocked by his grim appearance at a Zoom conference on Sunday.

Downing Street sources confirmed Mr Johnson is not yet on a ventilator - but was moved to intensive care to be near one if needed. Some medical experts forecasting this course of action is now 'very likely'.

Two thirds of patients in intensive care with coronavirus are sedated and put on a ventilator within 24 hours of arriving as the illness attacks their lungs.

But last night one doctor told The Times Mr Johnson was conscious and had not been intubated - the process of putting a tube in the windpipe to aid breathing. He was said to have required around four litres of oxygen rather than the 15 litres used by an average Covid-19 ICU patient.

Only two hours before his move to intensive care, No10 was insisting Mr Johnson was still spearheading the government's coronavirus response, despite de facto deputy Mr Raab chairing the morning crisis meeting.

Yet shortly after the Foreign Secretary left the Number 10 podium following the daily 5pm press briefing, Mr Johnson, 55, suffered breathing problem.

Sir Mark Sedwill, the cabinet secretary, held an emergency video conference with the cabinet to tell them the bad news, in a moment one minister described as 'truly shocking'.

No10 has been urged to be more 'transparent' about the premier's condition, amid claims a hospital bed was being prepared for him as early as last Thursday.

As the Prime Minister was treated in hospital:

A further 439 coronavirus deaths were announced, taking the toll to 5,373, while the number of patients rose by 3,802 to 51,608;

World leaders and politicians around the globe rallied around Mr Johnson, who received well wishers from David Cameron, Emmanuel Macron and Donald Trump;

Health experts tonight appeared unanimous in their view that the PM's admission to intensive care means he is 'extremely sick';

Humiliated Nicola Sturgeon has admitted the effort to combat coronavirus has been damaged after she was forced to accept the resignation of Scotland's chief medical officer for flouting her own lockdown rules.

Police guard an entrance to St Thomas' Hospital in London, where Mr Johnson is being cared for, as sources said he is not on a ventilator but doctorss fear he could need one

There is a heavy Metropolitan Police presence outside St Thomas' today where a source close to the PM said that there had been 'no change' in his condition overnight

Images show the Prime Minister's changing appearance as his battle with coronavirus continued from (top row left to right) March 27 and 28 and (bottom row left to right) April 1 and 2

In a round of broadcast interviews this morning, Cabinet minister Michael Gove said Mr Johnson was getting the 'best care'

Trump rallies round virus-stricken Prime Minister Donald Trump joined world leaders throwing their support behind Boris Johnson as he wished him a speedy recovery Donald Trump joined world leaders throwing their support behind Boris Johnson as he wished him a speedy recovery after he was moved in to intensive care battling coronavirus. Hundreds of messages of support have been sent to Mr Johnson by Conservative colleagues, opposition MPs and world leaders. The President, speaking at a White House press briefing, said: 'I want to send best wishes to a great friend of mine, and a great friend of our nation, Boris Johnson. 'We are very saddened to hear that he was taken into intensive car this afternoon, a little while ago. Americans are all praying for him. He's been a really good friend. 'He's very strong, resolute. Doesn't quit, doesn't give up.' French President Emmanuel Macron also wished Mr Johnson well, saying: 'All my support for Boris Johnson, his family and the British people at this difficult time. 'I wish him to overcome this ordeal quickly.' Advertisement

Speaking last night, Mr Raab vowed that 'government business will continue' and said there is a strong 'team spirit' rallying around the leader. He also reassured that the premier was 'receiving excellent care' and thanked the NHS staff who were treating him and other patients across Britain.

Mr Johnson's handing of power to Mr Raab - the second most senior cabinet minister after the PM himself - came after days of insisting he remained in the driving seat of the UK's fightback against the virus.

But on Sunday, the tenth day of isolation in his Number 11 flat, Mr Johnson's declining health became clear to Cabinet colleagues during a 10am Zoom video conference call.

During the 45-minute meeting with ministers including Michael Gove, Rishi Sunak and Matt Hancock, insiders described the PM as pale and strained, while some detected breathlessness as he spoke.

A Number 10 spokeswoman said last night: 'Since Sunday evening, the Prime Minister has been under the care of doctors at St Thomas' Hospital, in London, after being admitted with persistent symptoms of coronavirus.

'Over the course of this afternoon, the condition of the Prime Minister has worsened and, on the advice of his medical team, he has been moved to the Intensive Care Unit at the hospital.

'The PM has asked Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab, who is the First Secretary of State, to deputise for him where necessary.

'The PM is receiving excellent care, and thanks all NHS staff for their hard work and dedication.'

Downing Street has been accused of downplaying the seriousness of Mr Johnson's illness.

When he was admitted to hospital on Sunday night, Number 10 made clear he was undergoing tests as a precaution on the advice of his doctor.

But a Tory source said: 'No 10 tried to play this down but think it through: the Prime Minister was being taken to hospital in his car at 8pm on Sunday, the precise moment the Queen was making her broadcast to the nation. It therefore cannot have been completely routine.'

Insiders on the Sunday Zoom cabinet call also claimed it was clear Mr Johnson was not well.

A senior Whitehall source said: 'His symptoms were persisting. He was plainly not getting any better. In fact he'd got worse.'

Determined to emulate the grit of his political hero Winston Churchill, insiders said Mr Johnson was reluctant to go to hospital.

A source said: 'Do not underestimate the macho nature of the Westminster political Establishment. Boris will not have wanted to look weak.'

However, he eventually gave ground to his doctor and travelled to St Thomas' with bodyguards on Sunday night.

There can be a time lag of more than three weeks between someone becoming infected with coronavirus and dying. Symptoms take days - if not weeks - to become life-threatening. The death has to be recorded and reported, and the family notified, in a process that takes days

It was the first time Mr Johnson was believed to have left Downing Street since Thursday, when he stood on the steps of Number 11 to applaud NHS workers at 8pm.

This was the last time the PM has been seen in public and came amid whisperings in Westminster that he was not as well as aides were claiming.

As early as Thursday, a bed was being prepared for Mr Johnson at St Thomas', a source told the Guardian.

The next day, wearing an open collar shirt and looking exhausted, the PM used a Twitter video to reveal he had failed to shake off his high temperature and so would continue to self-isolate, while still keeping a firm hand on the tiller.

Mr Raab is now primed to take charge of the government's coronavirus response and deputise for Mr Johnson 'where necessary', although it is understood he will not be a temporary PM.

At yesterday's Downing Street press briefing, he confirmed a further 439 coronavirus deaths, taking the toll to 5,373, while the number of patients rose by 3,802 to 51,608.

St Thomas' hospital on the banks of the Thames in London where Boris Johnson was last night moved into intensive care

Police remained stationed outside St Thomas' last night as Prime Minister Boris Johnson was treated inside for coronavirus

Mr Raab, also First Secretary of State, is primed to take charge of the government's coronavirus response, but it is understood he is not a temporary prime minister (pictured at today's No 10 press briefing)

Fit for office? UK Prime Ministers who have fallen ill while at the helm On Monday evening Prime Minister Boris Johnson was taken into intensive care in London after his coronavirus symptoms worsened. But he's not the only British Prime Minister to become incapacitated by illness while serving at the helm. David Lloyd George: Lloyd George served as Prime Minister from 1916 to 1922. In September 1918 he developed a sore throat after visiting Manchester's Albert Square and mingling in crowds during a ceremony for soldiers and munitions workers. It later became clear he had Spanish influenza. He spent 11 days inside and was hooked up to a ventilator. Harold Wilson: Wilson served as Prime Minister from 1964 to 1970 and from 1974 to 1976. During his second term in office from 1974 to 1976 he suffered from colon cancer. It was also suggested that he had suffered from Alzheimer's after doctors analysed his speech patterns during his previous addresses. Winston Churchill: Churchill served as Prime Minister from 1940 to 1945 and again from 1951 to 1955. His personal physician claimed he suffered from clinical depression throughout his time as Prime Minister. In 1941 he suffered a heart attack at the White House and contracted pneumonia a few years later. In 1949 he also suffered a stroke on holiday and suffered a third while in office in 1953, leaving him paralysed on one side. In 1956 he suffered another stroke. Tony Blair: Blair served as Prime Minister from 1997 to 2007. In 2004 he was rushed to Hammersmith Hospital, where he was found to be suffering from supraventricular tachycardia, which is when a person suffers from an abnormal heart rhythm. In 2005 he received treatment for a heart flutter. Gordon Brown: Brown served as Prime Minister from 2007 to 2010. After a rugby accident as a teenager Mr Brown lost his sight in one eye. In 2009 he told the Andrew Marr show that this had made it difficult for him over the years. He said: 'I feel that I have done everything to show people that I can do the job even with the handicap that I've had as a result of a rugby injury.' Theresa May: May served as Prime Minster from 2016-2019. In 2012 she visited the doctor because she thought she had bronchitis but was actually diagnosed as having Type 1 Diabetes.

Health experts tonight appeared unanimous in their view that the PM's admission to intensive care means he is 'extremely sick'.

But the four litres of oxygen which the Times reports were given to Mr Johnson is below the 15-litre threshold for typical intensive care patients, suggesting he is not as ill as most in ICUs.

World leaders and politicians around the globe rallied around Mr Johnson, who received well wishers from David Cameron, Emmanuel Macron and Donald Trump.

Japan's Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has sent a tweet saying his thoughts and prayers are with Mr Johnson this morning.

He said: 'To my dear friend @BorisJohnson , my thoughts and prayers are with you and your family, as you fight for a swift recovery. The people of Japan stand with the British people at this difficult time.'

The Queen has also been kept informed by Downing Street about Mr Johnson's condition, Buckingham Palace said.

Mr Raab last night vowed to keep the machines of government firing on all cylinders while the PM recovered.

The one-time Tory leadership contender said: 'The Prime Minister is in safe hands with that brilliant team at St Thomas' hospital, and the focus of the Government will continue to be on making sure that the Prime Minister's direction, all the plans for making sure that we can defeat coronavirus and can pull the country through this challenge, will be taken forward.'

He added: 'There's an incredibly strong team spirit behind the Prime Minister, and making sure that we get all of the plans the Prime Minister's instructed us to deliver, to get them implemented as soon as possible.

'And that's the way it will bring the whole country through the coronavirus challenge that we face right now.'

Senior doctors branded the PM's admission to intensive care a 'huge concern' and underscores how indiscriminate the virus is.

Dr Simon Clarke, a professor on cellular microbiology at Reading University, told Sky News: 'The NHS particularly in this moment doesn't give up intensive care beds just for people to be looked over. It doesn't work that way even for PMs.

'He wouldn't be in intensive care unless he needed to be in intensive care. Especially not at this time.'

He added: 'It is probably about time that the press people in No10 started levelling with us about what his condition really is.'

Downing Street sources confirmed Mr Johnson is not yet on a ventilator, although medical experts forecast this course of action is 'very likely'.

Prof Derek Hill, Professor of Medical Imaging, University College London, said: 'As often happens with COVID-19, his condition has now deteriorated so he has been admitted to intensive care where he is very likely to have been put on a mechanical ventilator to breath for him.'

He added: 'One of the features of COVID-19 in all countries seems to be that many more men become seriously ill than women - especially in the over 40 age group.

'Also we know that people under about 60 seem to have a higher chance of making a recovery from critical illness with COVID-19 than older people. But there is no doubt this turn of events means Boris Johnson is extremely sick.'

Mr Raab, who tonight vowed to keep the machine of government ticking during the PM's recovery

The Prime Minister was transferred to the ICU at St Thomas' Hospital in London at 7pm this evening

Armed police patrol St Thomas' hospital, where the PM is in intensive care

Politicians of all stripes rallied around Mr Johnson, including from ex-prime minister David Cameron and French President Emmanuel Macron

Lockdown here to stay, says medical chief Professor Chris Whitty England's chief medical officer played down the prospects of a swift lifting of the coronavirus lockdown today. Professor Chris Whitty said that discussions about moving on to the next stage of the response to the pandemic would be premature until the nation has passed the peak number of deaths. He downplayed reports that this figure could be reached this weekend as he returned to fronting the daily news conference, following a week in self isolation. Flanking Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab he also warned people not to expect too much, too soon, from antibody tests that could give those who have had coronavirus and built up immunity, a way to return to normal life. He said: 'The key thing is to get to the point where we are confident we have reached the peak and this is now beyond the peak and at that point I think it is possible to have a serious discussion about all the things we need to do step-by-step to move to the next phase of managing this. 'But I think to start having that discussion until we're confident that that's where we've got to, would I think be a mistake.'

Mr Johnson's pregnant fiancée Carrie Symonds, who is due in the early summer, is self-isolating in her own Camberwell apartment with the couple's dog Dilyn after symptoms surfaced.

The 32-year-old said on Saturday: 'I've spent the past week in bed with the main symptoms of Coronavirus. I haven't needed to be tested and, after seven days of rest, I feel stronger and I'm on the mend.'

Politicians of all stripes rallied around Mr Johnson, including from ex-prime minister David Cameron and French President Emmanuel Macron.

Scotland First Minister Nicola Sturgeon tweeted: 'My thoughts are with the PM and his family - sending him every good wish.'

Business minister Nadim Zahawi tweeted: 'Thoughts & prayers for Boris Johnson & Carrie Symonds and their family.

'I have known Boris for 20 years he is a fighter and will beat this virus.'

Chancellor Rishi Sunak tweeted: 'My thoughts tonight are with Boris Johnson and Carrie Symonds. I know he'll be getting the best care possible and will come out of this even stronger.'

Members of the newly-formed shadow cabinet offered their support for the PM.

Shadow justice secretary David Lammy tweeted: 'Awful news. My very best wishes to the Prime Minister, as well as his partner Carrie, family and friends. Get well soon Boris Johnson.'

Mr Johnson fell ill with the virus on the same day as Health Secretary Matt Hancock, who has since recovered.

Alarm bells started ringing that the nerve centre of the government's crisis response had been compromised when chief medical officer Professor Chris Whitty and top Downing Street adviser Dominic Cummings also began showing symptoms. Meetings have since taken place via videolink.

Your questions answered as Boris Johnson is moved to intensive care in his battle against coronavirus Why did Mr Johnson first go to hospital? He was admitted to St Thomas' in London at around 8pm on Sunday, ten days after testing positive. Doctors advised him to seek treatment as his 'persistent symptoms', including a cough and a temperature, had not improved. His slow recovery is a red flag for complications including pneumonia. No 10 said it was a 'precautionary step' so Mr Johnson could have routine tests, which are likely to include procedures which can only be done in hospital. What happens in intensive care? Downing Street said the Prime Minister remained conscious last night and was moved to intensive care 'should he require ventilation'. There are two types of ventilators used: non-invasive ventilation and invasive ventilation. Non-invasive ventilation means the patient stays conscious and is given a specialised mask which pumps air at high pressure into the lungs. These are called continuous positive airway pressure machines. If this does not work, patients are intubated – have a tube put down their throat into their airway – and placed on an invasive ventilator. They have to be placed in a drug-induced coma and paralysed while the mechanical ventilator takes over their breathing. ICU ventilators have built-in sensors to adjust the amount of oxygen the patient needs. How common is it to be hospitalised and how high risk is he? The Prime Minister, 55, is one of 17,911 people to have been admitted to an NHS hospital with coronavirus so far. Latest research estimates between five and ten per cent of those who get the virus end up in hospital. The older you are, the more likely you are to need hospital treatment. A study found that eight per cent of people in their 50s with the virus need hospital treatment and 0.6 per cent die. Mr Johnson has no known underlying health conditions. But he has struggled with his weight and in December 2018 revealed that he weighed 16 and a half stone. Obesity is a risk factor for complications and men are more likely to be hospitalised than women. How long could he stay in intensive care? Some patients spend just a day there before recovering and going to a general ward. Others have spent more than three weeks in intensive care units. What initial tests and treatment did he have and why? Coronavirus is a respiratory disease so initial tests will have focused on establishing how badly his lungs were damaged. Most patients admitted to hospital with coronavirus have difficulty breathing and get oxygen support. Mr Johnson's oxygen saturation levels will have been monitored by a sensor clipped to a fingertip. Doctors will also have scanned his lungs. Other tests establish if major organs have been affected by a lack of oxygen. This includes an ECG and blood tests for the liver and kidneys. Patients have their white blood cell counts monitored to show immune response. His move to ICU suggests these key measures, most importantly oxygen levels, were continuing to deteriorate yesterday. What treatment could he receive? The highest level is mechanical ventilation, which requires patients to be fully sedated. There are no established drugs for coronavirus and antibiotics do not work on viruses. Could continuing to work make it worse? The Prime Minister did not take any time off and vowed to continue leading the Government from his hospital bed. But this went against NHS advice urging those with coronavirus to get plenty of rest and sleep. Exhaustion is a common symptom of coronavirus. Previous studies have shown that a lack of sleep and high stress can suppress the immune system.

Boris Johnson's coronavirus journey: Just FOUR WEEKS on from shaking hands with everyone in sight, the Prime Minister finds himself in isolation receiving oxygen treatment while struggling to shake off illness

By David Wilcock, Whitehall correspondent, and James Tapsfield, political editor for MailOnline

A month ago, Boris Johnson appeared to be on a mission to shake hands.

He locked paws with Holly Willoughby and Philip Schofield as he appeared on This Morning to discuss the latest steps to battle the then burgeoning outbreak, without alarming people.

He later manfully greeted Welsh Tory Lord Davies at the Welsh Conservative Party Conference in Llangollen.

Fast-forward to today and the Prime Minister is isolated in a London hospital after struggling to shake off his own brush with the killer pandemic.

Taking to Twitter, the 55-year-old insisted he was undergoing 'routine tests' and was 'still in touch with my team' as the government battles the deadly UK outbreak.

No10 has insisted it was not an emergency admission and the premier remains in control of the government's response, despite staying in hospital with no clear timeframe for being discharged.

This evening No10 announced that the Prime Minister had been admitted to intensive care.

There are warnings from ministers that Mr Johnson has 'risked his health' by keeping up a frantic workrate, while one senior Tory said he must learn he is 'not indispensable' and has to rest.

But it marks a fast turnaround in the PM's personal situation and sets out how his initial softly-softly, common-sense approach to the pandemic, mainly focused on washing hands, has quickly turned into the most severe peacetime lockdown of Britain.

Here is how the Last month has played out for the prime minister and senior members of the Cabinet:

March 3: Mr Johnson dismissed the trend for coronavirus 'elbow bumps' - saying he is perfectly happy to keep shaking hands with people. The PM joked that he was still carrying out the traditional greeting 'continuously', citing scientific advice that it is fine as long as you keep washing your hands.

March 5: He shook hands with Mr Schofield and Mrs Willoughby as he appeared on This Morning to reassure Britons that he would 'keep the country fed' during the coronavirus outbreak in a bid to stop panic-buyers from raiding supermarket shelves and stockpiling food. He later hosts a reception for International Women's Day in Downing Street with MP Nadine Dorries - who would become the first minister to contract Covid-19.

March 6: He meets scientists as he visits testing laboratory at Bedford Technology Park. Later he is pictured shaking hands with Byron Davies as he arrives at the Welsh Conservative Party Conference in the Llangollen Pavilion

He shook hands with Mr Schofield and Mrs Willoughby as he appeared on This Morning on March 5

Mr Johnson shaking hands with Byron Davies as he arrives at the Welsh Conservative Party Conference on March 6

Boris Johnson and his partner Carrie Symonds speak with heavyweight boxer Anthony Joshua at the Commonwealth Service at Westminster Abbey on Commonwealth Day on March 9

March 8: Surveys flood defences in the Worcestershire town of Bewdley

March 9: He attempts to shake hands with a bishop at Westminster Abbey before stopping himself while at Commonwealth Service

But he later shakes hands with heavyweight boxing champion Anthony Joshua.

March 10: Says people should avoid shaking hands, to shame other people into washing their hands

Health minister Nadine Dorries became the first MP to test positive for coronavirus, shortly after attending a Downing Street reception.

March 12: Mr Johnson says preventing mass gatherings is not an effective way to tackle coronavirus

March 16: He advises against mass gatherings in policy U-turn - effectively cancelling all sport and other events

March 17: Talks about importance of social distancing at briefing with Chancellor Rishi Sunak and Chief Scientific Officer Patrick Vallance

Boris Johnson with Chancellor Rishi Sunak and chief scientific officer Patrick Vallance at Downing Street on March 17

March 18: Speaks at Prime Minister's Questions in the House of Commons and says all schools will be closed

March 19: Says UK can 'turn the tide' in fight against coronavirus within 12 weeks at briefing with Chief Medical Officer Professor Chris Whitty and Chief Scientific Adviser Patrick Vallance

March 20: Closes pubs, restaurants and theatres at press conference with Chancellor Rishi Sunak and Deputy Chief Medical Officer Jenny Harries

March 21: Daily coronavirus update in the Cabinet Room

March 22: Media briefing with Communities Secretary Robert Jenrick and Deputy Chief Medical Officer Jenny Harries

March 23: Orders a UK-wide lockdown with people told to stay at home in a special televised address

March 24: Hosts weekly Cabinet Room meeting remotely

Prime Minister Boris Johnson's daily coronavirus update in the Cabinet Room on Saturday

Boris Johnson addresses the nation from Downing Street and imposes a lockdown on Monday

Boris Johnson chairs a weekly Cabinet meeting remotely from the Cabinet Rroom on Tuesday

Boris Johnson speaks at Prime Minister's Questions in the House of Commons on Wednesday

Boris Johnson joins in with a national applause for the NHS outside Downing Street last night

March 25: Speaks at Prime Minister's Questions in the House of Commons

March 25: Speaks to Queen Elizabeth II by telephone

March 26: Holds a video call to other G20 leaders and later joins in with a national applause for NHS staff.

March 27: Takes part in NHS clap for carers outside Downing Street with Chancellor Rishi Sunak

March 27: Announces in a video that he has tested positive for coronavirus

March 29: Issues video on social media thanking NHS, pharmacy and supermarket workers

March 31: Chairs digital Cabinet meeting

April 1: Says in social media video that testing will be 'massively ramped up'

April 2: Takes part in NHS clap for carers from Downing Street doorstep

April 3: Issues video on social media urging people to stay at home during sunny weather, and also reveals he is continuing to self-isolate as he is still suffering a temperature.

April 4: Carrie Symonds, the PM's pregnant fiancée reveals she has been self-isolating at her Camberwell flat.

April 5: Mr Johnson is admitted to an NHS hospital in London for tests

April 6: Mr Johnson is moved to intensive care after his condition worsened.

The coronavirus death lag explained: How it can take three weeks between catching the disease and being hospitalised (and three days for the NHS to record the fatality)

By Connor Boyd, health reporter for MailOnline

The rate of coronavirus infections is starting to slow in the UK, figures suggest – but it could take weeks before death rates fall.

This is because there can be more than a three-week lag between the time someone is diagnosed with the virus, their symptoms become deadly and the death is recorded.

The number of people dying in hospital with coronavirus is still doubling every three-and-a-half days despite confirmed cases and hospitalisations are slowing down.

Scientists say the death rate will also fall, but they warn Britain could still suffer a record high number of casualties in the coming days due to the lag.

It takes several days for a coronavirus patient to develop symptoms, and as long as a fortnight for the infection to become a life-threatening illness.

There can be a time lag of more than three weeks between someone becoming infected with coronavirus and dying. Symptoms take days - if not weeks - to become life-threatening. The death has to be recorded and reported, and the family notified, in a process that takes days

If the patient succumbs to the illness, the death has to be recorded and reported and the family notified. This process that can take up to three days.

The reporting delay means that once the UK has passed the peak of the outbreak, it may take several days for the death rate to reflect this.

The UK today announced 3,802 new positive coronavirus tests - 2,101 fewer than 5,903 yesterday and only the second time since March that the number has been below 4,000.

The number of new cases is also lower than it was for almost all of last week, suggesting the draconian social restrictions are working.

More than 51,000 people have now been diagnosed with the infection in the UK. Officials also declared 439 more deaths, taking the total to 5,373.

The number of people dying of COVID-19 has now fallen for two days in a row and today dropped 30 per cent from 621 yesterday.

Today's death count is the lowest since March 31, last Tuesday, when it was 381, and marks a 39 per cent fall from the UK's worst day so far, Saturday, when the deaths of 708 people were recorded.

Falling figures may be a reason to be cheerful, but experts have warned against pinning too much significance to day-by-day numbers.

Statistics recorded on Sundays and published on Mondays have, since the outbreak in the UK began, been routinely followed by an upward surge on Tuesday. Last Monday's figure was 13 per cent lower than Sunday's.

Over the past three weeks, the number of new deaths reported has been doubling every three-and-a-half days. Scientists expect this to continue.

NHS England revealed 403 more deaths have been recorded in its hospitals, among people aged between 35 and 106. All but 15 of them had other health problems.

Scotland, which was the first to declare new cases today, noted 255 new positive tests and just four new deaths, taking its totals to 222 and 3,961.

Wales declared a further 302 cases and 27 more deaths, meaning it has now had 3,499 positive tests and 193 people have died.

The majority of the deaths happened in London again, with a total of 129, followed by 75 in the Midlands, 67 in the North East and Yorkshire, 44 in the East of England, 43 in the North West, 27 in the South West and 18 in the South East.

Hopes are rising across Europe now that governments' drastic lockdown measures are working.

Italy yesterday recorded its lowest one-day death toll in two weeks - since March 20 - with 525 fatalities announced.

Spain today revealed its fewest deaths in a day since March 24 (637) and Germany announced its lowest number in a week (92).

The tumbling figures - if they carry on - show that strict government policies telling people to remain at home unless necessary are stopping the virus from spreading.

And some countries in Europe have already started to draw up plans for their exits from lockdown, with Austria setting targets to start reopening businesses after the Easter weekend.

Austria today became the first country to set out detailed plans for ending the standstill, with smaller shops re-opening on April 14 and larger ones on May 1.

Denmark also plans to start lifting restrictions after Easter, but wants people to 'work in a more staggered way' to avoid crowding into trains and buses.

Meanwhile Germany is willing to re-open schools on a regional basis and allow a limited number of people into restaurants if the infection rate stays sufficiently low. There have been more than 100,000 cases diagnosed in Germany.

In Italy, which has been under lockdown longer than any other European country, officials are talking about a 'phase two' where society learns to 'live with the virus' by wearing masks and carrying out more tests.

Italy and Germany are among the countries looking at smartphone tracking, which could allow them to jump on new outbreaks without sending everyone back inside.

All of those countries, along with Spain, have seen signs of improvement in their recent figures which offer hope that the crisis is past its peak. That moment is still to come for Britain and America, which are bracing for one of their bleakest weeks.

However, health officials across Europe warn that life cannot go back 'from 0 to 100' immediately and many lockdown measures will remain in place for several more weeks at least.

Italy is openly talking about a 'phase two' in which society will have to 'create the conditions to live with the virus' until a vaccine is developed.

Health minister Roberto Speranza says more testing and a beefed-up local health system would be necessary to allow an easing of the lockdown.

He said social distancing would have to remain in place, with more widespread use of personal protective equipment such as face masks.

Testing and 'contact tracing' would be extended, including with the use of smartphone apps, in order to contain new outbreaks.

A network of hospitals would also be set up which are specifically dedicated to virus patients, after doctors on existing wards described having to make life-or-death decisions over access to intensive care.

'There are difficult months ahead. Our task is to create the conditions to live with the virus,' at least until a vaccine is developed, the health minister told La Repubblica newspaper.

The national lockdown, strictly limiting people's movements and freezing all non-essential economic activity, will officially last until at least April 13 but it is widely expected to be extended.

Dominic Raab takes the reins: Foreign Secretary is called on to 'deputise for' stricken PM Boris Johnson while he is in intensive care

Boris Johnson tonight effectively handed the reins of government to Dominic Raab as he battles coronavirus in intensive care.

Downing Street said the PM had 'deputised' the Foreign Secretary - who as First Secretary of State is officially the second highest ranking minister - before his condition became more serious.

However, Mr Johnson has not resigned and so continues to be the formal leader of the government.

The UK does not have a written constitution and the chain of command is largely based on convention.

Since the end of the Tory-Lib Dem Coalition in 2015 there has not been a deputy PM.

Instead Mr Cameron, Theresa May and now Mr Johnson appointed First Secretaries of State to denote who was second in line.

Downing Street is said to have drawn up plans to ensure the continuation of government in all circumstances but details have not been divulged publicly.

It is not immediately clear what would happen if Mr Raab also became incapacitated, with the UK not having a formal system of succession like other countries, for example the US.

In a Twitter video posted on Friday from quarantine in No11, where he has been in self-isolation, an exhausted-looking Mr Johnson revealed he was still suffering from a high temperature

The Prime Minster 'deputised' Dominic Raab as he was admitted to intensive care tonight.

Police officers are seen today outside St Thomas' Hospital in London, a short distance from Downing Street, after Mr Johnson was admitted for tests on Sunday

Dominic Raab, a karate black belt, is married without any children to Erika (together), a Brazilian-born marketing executive

Mr Raab's status as the person waiting in the wings reportedly sparked furious rows within the government a fortnight ago, with other ministers adamant Michael Gove, the Minister for the Cabinet Office, should be the one to take over.

Dominic Raab: Karate black belt and relative Cabinet novice The MP for Esher and Walton worked as an in-house lawyer for the Foreign Office in 2000, before returning to the department in Boris Johnson's post-election reshuffle. The former grammar school boy, born to a Czech Jewish father who fled the Nazis in 1938 to Britain as a refugee before the Second World War, helped bring war criminals to justice in The Hague during his first stint in the Foreign Office. Mr Raab is a karate black belt and former boxing blue at Oxford University in 1995. The 45-year-old is married without any children to Erika, a Brazilian-born marketing executive who was wheeled out for photoshoots in his leadership campaign. He has described how his father Peter fled the Nazis and came to Britain aged six. His father learned English, worked for M&S as a food manager and met his mother Jean, who was from Bromley, Kent. He died when Dominic was 12 after losing his battle with cancer. The appointment to Foreign Secretary was a major promotion for Mr Raab, who up to then had just four months experience in the Cabinet after a stint as Brexit Secretary last year. Last summer he stood in the Tory leadership race on a hardcore Brexiteer ticket even harder than Mr Johnson. But after being knocked out he quickly backed his former rival and supported him in his campaign.

But Number 10 is likely to face intense pressure in the coming days to set out exactly what would happen if Mr Johnson and other senior ministers can no longer work.

If Mr Johnson could no longer carry on in post and resigned, the Cabinet would in the first instance choose a successor.

They would need to carry the support of the Conservative MPs - although it is unlikely anyone would force a leadership contest at a time of massive crisis.

At the weekend it was revealed that two of the most senior Ministers leading the Government response to the coronavirus crisis are locked in battle over when to lift the economically devastating lockdown.

Chancellor Rishi Sunak has made 'robust' representations to Health Secretary Matt Hancock, arguing that unless a path is mapped now for a swift return to normal economic activity it could cause lasting damage to the country.

Government critics of Mr Hancock argue his 'careerist' fear of being personally blamed for a collapse in the NHS is blinding him to the dangers of a protracted lockdown.

But allies of Mr Hancock hit back, saying: 'He is just doing his job, which is to protect the NHS.'

One MP suggested that the PM was too keen to emulate his hero, Winston Churchill and should rest.

But Downing Street described last night's shock move as a 'precautionary step', insisting that he continued to lead the Government, and remained in touch with ministers and senior officials.

Communities Secretary Robert Jenrick stressed it was not an emergency admission and that he expected him to be back in Downing Street 'shortly'.

'He's been working extremely hard leading the Government and being constantly updated,' he told BBC Breakfast.

'That's going to continue.

'Obviously today he's in hospital having the tests but he will continue to be kept informed as to what's happening and to be in charge of the Government.

Downing Street said Dominic Raab (pictured right) will take over if the PM is incapacitated but there have been claims some ministers have pushed for Michael Gove to be given the job

How are ministers ranked? 1. Boris Johnson, Prime Minister 2. Dominic Raab, Foreign Secretary and First Secretary of State 3. Rishi Sunak, Chancellor of the Exchequer 4. Priti Patel, Home Secretary 5. Michael Gove, Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster 6. Robert Buckland, Lord Chancellor and Justice Secretary 7. Ben Wallace, Defence Secretary 8. Matt Hancock, Health Secretary 9. Alok Sharma, Business Secretary 10. Liz Truss, International Trade Secretary 11. Therese Coffey, Work and Pensions Secretary 12. Gavin Williamson, Education Secretary 13. George Eustice, Environment Secretary 14. Robert Jenrick, Communities Secretary 15. Brandon Lewis, Northern Ireland Secretary 16. Alister Jack, Scotland Secretary 17. Simon Hart, Wales Secretary 18. Baroness Evans, Leader of the House of Lords 19. Oliver Dowden, Culture Secretary 20. Anne-Marie Trevelyan, International Development Secretary 21. Amanda Milling, Minister without Portfolio (Conservative Party chairwoman)

'I'm sure this is very frustrating for him, for somebody like Boris who wants to be hands on running the Government from the front, but nonetheless he's still very much in charge of the Government.'

In a Twitter video posted on Friday from quarantine in No11, where he has been in self-isolation, an exhausted-looking Mr Johnson revealed he was still suffering from a high temperature.

Experts say there is a risk of pneumonia when a temperature lasts more than a week. There have been claims Mr Johnson has been coughing heavily during conference calls.

The UK has four great offices of state: Prime Minister, Chancellor of the Exchequer, Foreign Secretary and Home Secretary.

But beyond that there is no public plan on the line of succession should the PM be struck down.

The US is one of a number of countries which has such a plan: If the President cannot work, the Vice President takes over and so on down a long list of government figures.

The US also has a 'designated survivor' - someone in the line of succession who is told to stay away from major events like inaugurations and State of the Union Addresses in case something bad happens and they can then step in as commander in chief.

Successive prime ministers have resisted calls to formally set out succession plans because of the message they fear it would convey to the public and because of the damage it could do to their political standing.

But there have been repeated attempts by backbench MPs to pass a law formalising the succession issue.

Mr Raab, Mr Gove, Chancellor Rishi Sunak and Health Secretary Matt Hancock are widely seen as the most important ministers in the government at the moment in terms of combating coronavirus.

Each chairs a committee coordinating different parts of the government's response to the crisis.Mr Gove's is focused on public sector preparedness, Mr Hancock's is focused on NHS capacity, Mr Raab's deals with the overseas response and Mr Sunak's looks at the economy.

'He's very strong, doesn't quit, doesn't give up': Donald Trump praises ailing Boris Johnson as support flows in from around the world and both sides of the political spectrum

Donald Trump joined world leaders throwing their support behind Boris Johnson as he wished him a speedy recovery after he was moved in to intensive care battling coronavirus.

Hundreds of messages of support have been sent to Mr Johnson by Conservative colleagues, opposition MPs and world leaders.

The President, speaking at a White House press briefing, said: 'I want to send best wishes to a great friend of mine, and a great friend of our nation, Boris Johnson.

'We are very saddened to hear that he was taken into intensive car this afternoon, a little while ago. Americans are all praying for him. He's been a really good friend.

'He's very strong, resolute. Doesn't quit, doesn't give up.'

French President Emmanuel Macron also wished Mr Johnson well, saying: 'All my support for Boris Johnson, his family and the British people at this difficult time.

'I wish him to overcome this ordeal quickly.'

The Prime Minister was moved to intensive care at St Thomas' hospital in Westminster a day after first being admitted as a 'precautionary measure'

Donald Trump joined world leaders throwing their support behind Boris Johnson as he wished him a speedy recovery

President Trump also told reporters that he's asked three 'genius' therapeutic drug companies to 'contact London' immediately to offer Mr Johnson medical support.

He added: 'We'll see if we can be of help... we've contacted all of Boris's doctors, and we'll see what is going to take place.'

'They are ready to go. But when you get brought into intensive care it gets very serious, with this particular disease.'

When questioned on what treatment was being offered, Mr Trump said: 'A very complex treatment of things they have just developed. They have already had meetings with the doctors and we will see whether they want to go down that road.'

Ivanka Trump, the daughter of US president Donald Trump, added: 'My thoughts and prayers are with @BorisJohnson and his family. Godspeed Mr. Prime Minister!'

Wellwishes came from across the political divide, with newly-appointed Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer quickly throwing his support to the Prime Minister after learning of the 'terribly sad news.'

Political heavyweights from France, the United States and Parliament sent a wave of wellwishes to the Prime Minister after he was moved to intensive care

'All the country's thoughts are with the Prime Minister and his family during this incredibly difficult time,' wrote Sir Keir.

Mr Starmer's predecessor Jeremy Corbyn wrote: 'My thoughts are with Boris Johnson and his family tonight.

'Thanks to the NHS staff for their hard work and dedication.'

Chancellor Rishi Sunak wrote on Twitter: 'My thoughts tonight are with Boris Johnson and Carrie Symonds.

'I know he'll be getting the best care possible and will come out of this even stronger.'

Scotland First Minister Nicola Sturgeon wrote: 'My thoughts are with the PM and his family - sending him every good wish.'

David Cameron, the former Prime Minister, tweeted: 'Thinking of Boris Johnson and his family tonight. Get well soon. You are in great hands and we all want you safe, well and back in 10 Downing Street.'

Former chancellor Sajid Javid said: 'Boris is one of the strongest people I know. Thinking of him, Carrie and his family tonight. Get well soon, the country needs you.'

Shadow justice secretary David Lammy tweeted: 'Awful news. My very best wishes to the Prime Minister, as well as his partner Carrie, family and friends. Get well soon @BorisJohnson.'

Shadow health secretary Jonathan Ashworth tweeted: 'Tonight we're all wishing Boris Johnson well for a swift recovery. I know the NHS will be truly brilliant in caring for him and I again send my very best wishes to his family.'

London Mayor Sadiq Khan wrote: 'Praying for the Prime Minister's swift recovery tonight. @GSTTnhs (Guy's and St Thomas' NHS) has some of the finest medical staff in the world, and he couldn't be in safer hands.'

Trade Minister Liz Truss said: 'My thoughts are with the Prime Minister and his family as he is moved into intensive care this evening. Wishing him a speedy recovery.'

Brexit Party leader Nigel Farage posted on Twitter: 'I hope and pray for @BorisJohnson to come through this ordeal quickly.'

The Prime Minister was transferred to the ICU at St Thomas' Hospital in London at 7pm this evening - 11 days after testing positive for the deadly disease.

He remains conscious and Number 10 sources stressed he had been moved to the critical care unit as a precaution should he require a ventilator.

But Mr Johnson has asked foreign secretary Dominic Raab to deputise for him 'where necessary', although it is understood Mr Raab will not formally become a temporary prime minister.

Speaking tonight after the PM was moved to intensive care, Mr Raab insisted that 'government business will continue' and said there is a fantastic 'team spirit' among ministers.

He also reassured that the premier was 'receiving excellent care' and thanked the NHS medics who were treating him and other patients across Britain.

The Prime Minister (pictured on Thursday evening), who was admitted to St Thomas' Hospital in London last night, was taken to intensive care at 7pm this evening

Mr Raab's role as first secretary of state - the second most senior cabinet minister after the PM - means he is primed to take charge of the government's coronavirus response at this critical period as cases approach the peak.

Following the PM's hospitalisation last night on the advice of his doctor, Mr Raab had already stepped up to chair this morning's daily meeting of top officials steering the nation through the health crisis.

And at this afternoon's Downing Street press briefing, he confirmed a further 439 coronavirus deaths, taking the toll to 5,373, while the number of patients rose by 3,802 to 51,608.

Mr Johnson was still in charge during this press conference, but his symptoms spiralled and he required oxygen, prompting the move to critical care, according to Sky News.

Health experts tonight appeared unanimous in their view that the PM's admission to intensive care means he is 'extremely sick'.

What happens to coronavirus patients when they are admitted to intensive care?

British medics were clear last night – Boris Johnson would not be in an intensive care unit unless he definitely needed to be.

The move marks a serious escalation in his treatment and will not have been taken lightly by his team of doctors at London's St Thomas' hospital.

'The NHS, particularly in this moment, doesn't give up intensive care beds just for people to be looked over,' Reading University's Dr Simon Clarke said.

So what is in store for a patient battling coronavirus who requires ICU treatment?

Medical teams treating the most seriously ill patients will work one-on-one in the wards and have a host of equipment to measure every aspect of people's bodies from heartbeat and temperature to their exact blood oxygen level – a key indicator in coronavirus deterioration.

Police officers stand in front of Emergency Department outside St Thomas' Hospital in London

What is an intensive care unit like? Patients on an ICU will be looked after closely by medics and will be connected to equipment by a number of tubes, wires and cables. There will normally be one nurse for every one or two patients patients. Equipment used includes a ventilator (common among coronavirus patients), monitoring equipment, IV lines and pumps, feeding tubes, drains and catheters. This equipment is used to monitor their health and support their bodily functions until they recover. Patients in an intensive care ward can often be sedated because some of the equipment used makes them uncomfortable. Intensive care units throughout the country have been put under immense strain by coronavirus, such that they have stopped or restricted visits. Source: NHS

Even within ICU, some patients will be 'better' than others. Sources told The Times last night that Mr Johnson had needed four litres of oxygen, compared to 15l for some more desperately ill patients.

At one end of the spectrum, those being treated will remain conscious and 'continuous positive airway pressure' or CPAP treatment is used.

With this, patients are put in a hood or tightly fitting mask and oxygen is delivered at higher pressure to keep the airways open. This is especially useful for people suffering pneumonia, which sources denied was the case for Mr Johnson.

But at the other end of that spectrum, mechanical ventilation will be necessary – with the patient placed in a medically induced coma. Tubes will be placed into their windpipes to breath for them and their heart, lungs and other organs will be constantly monitored. Drugs and fluids, as needed, will be dispensed.

Derek Hill, Professor of Medical Imaging at UCL, said tonight: 'A ventilator can be invasive, involving a tube being put down the patient's throat, or non-invasive, for example, breathing through a specialised mask. Invasive ventilation tends to be recommended for COVID-19 patients.'

The ventilators - which use sophisticated software and sensors to adjust the levels of oxygen required - can be administered to a conscious or unconscious patient.

The Prime Minister may be put on an ECMO machine, a highly specialised device that is more sophisticated than a ventilator.

St Thomas' is one of just six UK hospitals with a centre for adult ECMO – extra-corporeal membrane oxygenation. The machines, which take the blood out of the body to remove the carbon dioxide and replenish the oxygen, are used on patients whose lungs are not working properly.

The treatment costs an average of £45,000 a head, but makes recovery much easier because it allows the lungs time to heal.

A busy intensive care ward at UCL, with facemask-wearing medics looking after patients in the London hospital amid the coronavirus outbreak

The BBC's Fergus Walsh showed NHS staff treating patients inside intensive care at University College Hospital in London

An Italian patient receiving CPAP treatment, as seen in a Sky News report from northern Italy

Wherever course of action his doctors are using on the Prime Minister, medics said being on an intensive care ward – even being in a private room – would be frightening for a patient and could last days even if he is not hooked up to machines.

Intensive care units can be overwhelming places for both patients and their loved ones, although the highly transmissible nature of coronavirus means many hospitals have stopped or restricted visits.

Mr Raab, also First Secretary of State, is primed to take charge of the government's coronavirus response, but it is understood he is not a temporary prime minister (pictured at today's No 10 press briefing)

Ambulances outside at St Thomas' Hospital in central London as Prime Minister Boris Johnson was moved to intensive care after his coronavirus symptoms worsened

Linda Bauld, a public health professor at the University of Edinburgh, said: 'The admission of the Prime Minister to intensive care is of huge concern and illustrates just how indiscriminate this virus is.

'Anyone anywhere, including the most privileged in our society, can be affected and can become seriously ill. It is imperative now, more than ever that the rest of us comply with government guidelines to stay at home and not put others at risk.

'All our thoughts will be with the Prime Minister and his family, and the many other families who are facing similar circumstances with critically ill relatives.'

St Thomas' is a major teaching hospital that specialises in critical care.

It is situated on the Thames opposite the Houses of Parliament and has two intensive care units that house 19 permanent beds. St Thomas' also specialises in heart and lung surgery, obstetrics and gynaecology and children's medicine.

Once a patient no longer requires intensive care they can begin what is often a long road towards a full recovery, although sometimes there are lingering problems.

Health experts say that as a general rule patients will need a week of convalescence for every week that they are in intensive care.

And they agreed tonight that the PM's admission to intensive care means he is 'extremely sick'.