President Trump described the European Union as "a foe" in an interview aired Sunday, ahead of his meeting with Russian President Vladimir Putin in Finland.

"I think we have a lot of foes," Trump told CBS News. "I think the European Union is a foe, what they do to us in trade. Now, you wouldn't think of the European Union, but they are a foe."

He continued: "Russia is a foe in certain respects. China is a foe, economically, certainly they are a foe. But that doesn't mean they are bad. It doesn't mean anything. It means they are competitors. They want to do well and we want to do well."

The suggestion elicited swift backlash from European Commission President Donald Tusk, who accused Trump of "spreading fake news." Appropriating one of Trump's favorite terms, Tusk tweeted: "America and the EU are best friends. Whoever says we are foes is spreading fake news."

Trump defended his characterization of the EU as an opponent, saying, "I love those countries, I respect the leaders of those countries, but in a trade sense they have really taken advantage of us."

The comments came hours after British Prime Minister Theresa May said she was advised by Trump to sue the EU rather than negotiate with the bloc over "Brexit" during his visit to the United Kingdom.

As they held a joint press conference Friday, Trump mentioned he had given May some advice, but noted she found it "too brutal." Asked about that during an interview with the BBC's Andrew Marr, May said that the longtime businessman advised her to take legal action. "He told me I should sue the EU — sue the EU — not go into negotiations, sue them," she said. "Actually, no, no, we're going into negotiations with them. But interestingly what the president also said at that press conference was don't walk away — don't walk away from negotiations, because then you're stuck."

During his interview with CBS, Trump also criticized military allies in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization for not spending more money on defense, and Germany for purchasing energy from Russia — a line of criticism he opened last week, claiming that Germany was a Russian "captive."

Regarding the EU, he added: "Many of those countries are in NATO and they weren't paying their bills. And I, as an example, have a big problem with Germany, because Germany made a pipeline deal with Russia where they are going to be paying Russia billions and billions of dollars a year for energy. And I say that's not good, that's not fair. You're supposed to be fighting for someone, and then that someone gives billions of dollars to the one that you're guarding against? I think that's ridiculous."

In the same interview, Trump addressed the indictment of 12 Russian government officials by special counsel Robert Mueller for allegedly hacking Democratic emails during the 2016 election.

"I think the DNC should be ashamed of themselves for allowing themselves to be hacked," he said.