President Donald Trump announced Friday that he will decertify the Iran nuclear deal but will not urge Congress to immediately reimpose nuclear-related sanctions on the country, instead calling for new legislation that could trigger penalties down the line.

He also unveiled other initiatives aimed at reining in the longtime U.S. nemesis, including plans for new sanctions on Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard military corps over allegations that it supports terrorism.

Advertisement

“History has shown that the longer we ignore a threat, the more dangerous that threat becomes,” Trump said in remarks from the Diplomatic Reception Room at the White House. "We will not continue down a path whose predictable conclusion is more violence, more terror and the very real threat of Iran's nuclear breakout."

The president predicated his new approach to the Islamic Republic on a litany of bad behavior that he said includes Iran's support for groups labeled by the U.S. as terrorist organizations and its oppression of its own people. He reiterated his longtime claim that "the Iran deal was one of the worst and most one-sided transactions the United States has ever entered into" and accused Iran of violating the deal on multiple occasions.

"Given the regime's past and present, we should not take lightly the sinister vision for the future," the president said in televised remarks. "While the United States adheres to our commitment under the deal, the Iranian regime continues to feel conflict, terror, and turmoil throughout the Middle East and beyond. Importantly, Iran is not living up to the spirit of the deal. So today, in recognition of the increasing menace posed by Iran and after extensive consultations with our allies, I am announcing a new strategy to address the full range of Iran's destructive actions."

POLITICO Playbook newsletter Sign up today to receive the #1-rated newsletter in politics Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.

Later Friday, as he departed the White House to visit a Secret Service training center, Trump told reporters that he still "may very well" pull the U.S. completely out of the Iran deal. He added that Iran "should thank Barack Obama for making that deal," which Trump said infused billions into its economy.

Iranian President Hassan Rouhani said Friday that the nuclear deal struck between his nations and the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council plus Germany is "much more strong" than what Trump has suggested, according to an Associated Press report.

Rouhani said his nation "will continue to stick to" the agreement, but cautioned that Iran could change its mind.

The decertification plan, which Secretary of State Rex Tillerson first outlined with reporters late Thursday, strikes a blow at the Iran deal, a central piece of former President Barack Obama’s foreign policy legacy, without outright killing it. It throws a sensitive issue to Congress at a time when even many of Trump’s fellow Republicans are hesitant to tackle it. There’s also no guarantee that the other parties to the nuclear deal — Britain, France, China, Russia and Germany, but especially Iran — will consider new U.S. legislation as binding on them.

“This is a much broader strategic approach than has been taken with Iran in the past,” Tillerson said, a nod to the Trump administration’s months-long review of the United States’ overall Iran policy. He added, however, “I don’t want to suggest to you this is a slam dunk up there on [Capitol Hill]. We know it’s not.”

The nuclear deal was struck in 2015 after years of intense international talks. It lifted nuclear-related sanctions on Iran in exchange for curbs on the nation’s nuclear program; the agreement did not deal with Iran’s non-nuclear activities, and it was not a treaty subject to Senate approval.

Congress, however, found a way to weigh in, including through passing a law that requires the president to certify or decertify to lawmakers every 90 days whether Iran is complying with the agreement.

Trump is suspicious of Iranian aims and has long cast the nuclear deal as weak and flawed, in part because some of its provisions expire starting within a decade. He has pushed back against the advice of Tillerson and other top aides to keep certifying the deal, even though international inspectors say Iran is in compliance.

Trump’s decision to decertify the deal by mid-October will start a 60-day clock for lawmakers to decide whether to reimpose U.S. sanctions on Iran. Tillerson said that Trump would decertify it on the grounds that he does not believe the sanctions relief that Iran is getting is proportional to benefits that come from Iran’s efforts to curb its nuclear program.

But Trump stopped short of asking Congress to go ahead and reimpose the sanctions, a step that could lead to the collapse of the deal.

Instead, the president will call for amendments to the law requiring congressional review of the deal. The amendments, according to Tillerson, would include specific “trigger points” that would automatically reimpose U.S. nuclear-related sanctions depending on Iran’s behavior.

“If Iran crosses any of these trigger points, the sanctions automatically go back in place,” Tillerson said. “These are trigger points specific to the nuclear program itself, but they also deal with things like [Iran’s] ballistic missile program,” which was not addressed in the nuclear deal.

In addition, the amendments would preserve the idea that although some provisions of the nuclear deal are temporary, the United States considers them permanent. The goal with the amendments, Tillerson said, is to put pressure on Iran — and, presumably, U.S. allies — to come back to the table and negotiate a new set of side agreements that do away with the weaknesses of the 2015 deal.

Tillerson said U.S. officials had been floating some or all of these ideas to congressional leaders and foreign allies and partners. Some of the ideas were shared with Iran when Tillerson encountered his Iranian counterpart, Foreign Minister Javad Zarif, on the sidelines of the U.N. General Assembly last month.

Supporters of the nuclear deal, including European leaders, have spent weeks urging Trump not to move against it in any way, especially since his own government — including Tillerson on Thursday — acknowledge that Iran is in technical compliance with its requirements. Even a decertification under the U.S. law, some warn, could be the start of a process that ultimately weakens the deal until it craters, possibly putting Iran back on the path to a nuclear weapon.

The intense lobbying in recent days suggests that the idea of enhancing U.S. law to address the international deal’s flaws is not necessarily being embraced by the affected foreign leaders. The Iranians, for instance, have described the “decertification” process as a domestic political move not binding on their country, which hasn’t had diplomatic relations with the United States for nearly 40 years.

In a conference call with reporters ahead of Trump's announcement, a trio of Obama-era officials involved in the Iran deal's original negotiation and implementation defended the agreement and dismissed the president's rationale for decertifying it.

"So what is apparent here is that Trump’s team was forced to search for a rationalization for an irrational decision to decertify a deal that Iran is complying with," former deputy national security adviser Ben Rhodes said. "Essentially, Trump is urging Congress to do something that could precipitate a nuclear crisis with Iran at the same time that he is faced with a significant crisis on the Korean Peninsula."

Rhodes added that any step by the U.S. to unilaterally alter the agreement could be interpreted as a violation of the nuclear deal, and allow Iran to exploit divisions between the U.S. and its allies.

"I think members of Congress need to think very carefully about the risk of passing legislation that blows up this deal and removes the constraints on Iran’s program and could lead us into a war. That’s what’s before Congress right now," Rhodes said.

While Tillerson acknowledged Thursday that there were skeptics, including on Capitol Hill, he said that either the various parties could “put more teeth” into the arrangement, “or let's forget the whole thing.”

Although Republicans, along with some Democrats, opposed the deal in 2015, two years later some are wary of taking any step that could wreck it. Rep. Ed Royce (R-Calif.), the chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, indicated this week that the deal should stay in place but that the U.S. must “enforce the hell out of it.”

Even some of the most hard-line anti-Iran members of Congress, such as Sen. Tom Cotton (R-Ark.), have said they don’t think sanctions should be reimposed yet. Cotton and other critics of the deal agree with Tillerson’s argument, however, that the mere threat of renewed sanctions could force the affected parties back to the table to negotiate a deal that’s tougher on the government in Tehran.

Neither Iran nor any of the other parties to the deal have shown a willingness to reopen the talks and amend the existing agreement. But some allies, in particular France, have signaled an openness to the idea of future talks about separate agreements that could function alongside the nuclear deal and address, for instance, the sunset provisions.

A great deal could come down to the specifics of any amendment that Congress considers. If Iran takes a step that triggers Congress to re-impose sanctions on Iran under a new amendment, but not under the actual nuclear agreement, the Iranians could argue that the U.S. is flat-out violating the deal. The Iranians also could argue that including non-nuclear activities as a trigger point would violate the spirit of an agreement about nuclear issues.

And the Iranians are unlikely to acquiesce to any agreement that restricts them on every front forever. In any case, the Iranians and other supporters of the existing deal point out that parts of it are permanent. Besides, the deal’s supporters argue, Iran, by virtue of being a signatory to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, is bound to avoid obtaining nuclear weapons. Iran itself has always said its nuclear program is for scientific and other peaceful purposes.

While the fate of the nuclear deal could deepen divisions in Congress, especially within the GOP, there is broad bipartisan agreement that the U.S. must do more to rein in Iran’s non-nuclear activities, including its support for terrorist groups, its ballistic missile tests and its human rights abuses.

Those activities were not covered by the deal, and the U.S. already has in place numerous sanctions on Iran related to those issues.

Recent legislation passed by Congress instructs the administration to do more to penalize the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, which is accused of supporting many terrorist groups and militias throughout the Middle East.

Tillerson said that Trump would ask the Treasury Department to impose additional terrorism-related sanctions on individuals and entities affiliated with the IRGC. But he indicated that the administration would not designate the whole of the Revolutionary Guard as a “foreign terrorist organization.”

Such a designation of a foreign government unit would be highly unusual — possibly unprecedented. It could also lead to a host of complications, especially considering that the U.S. military operates in some spheres where IRGC affiliates are present, and the two at times have to find ways to interact. Iran has warned against such a designation of the Revolutionary Guard, hinting at retaliation against U.S. forces.

Tillerson indicated that the administration hoped Congress would move swiftly on passing legislation to strengthen the U.S. hand against Iran, hopefully before Trump faces another deadline to report to Congress on Iranian compliance, in just over three months. Negotiating any side agreements to address the nuclear deal’s flaws will take longer, Tillerson said.

The secretary of state said Trump himself believed the nuclear deal was so flawed that he was “not optimistic” that it could survive. But instead of reimposing sanctions and simply killing the agreement now, Trump wants to try this other route involving Congress.

“We may be unsuccessful,” Tillerson said. “We may not be able to fix it. And if not, we may end up out of the deal.”

